O-RAN.WG11.SecTestSpecs-v04.00

                    O-RAN.WG11.SecTestSpecs-v04.00

Technical Specification

O-RAN Working Group 11 (Security Work Group)

O-RAN Security Test Specifications

Copyright © 2023 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.

The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this specification in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material of this specification for your personal use, or copy the material of this specification for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.

O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V., Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany

Register of Associations, Bonn VR 11238, VAT ID DE321720189

Contents

List of figures	5

List of tables	5

Foreword	6

Modal verbs terminology	6

1 Scope	7

2 References	8

2.1 Normative references	8

2.2 Informative references	9

3 Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations	10

3.1 Terms

3.2 Abbreviations	10

4 Objectives and scope	12

5 Testing methodology and configuration	13

5.1 DUT / SUT	13

5.2 Test Setup	14

5.3 Test and measurement equipment and tools	14

5.4 Test report	16

5.5 Assumptions	16

6 Security Protocol Validation	17

6.1 Overview	17

6.2 STC-6-001: SSH Server & Client	17

6.2.1 Test description and applicability	17

6.2.2 Test setup and configuration	17

6.2.3 Test procedure	18

6.2.4 Test requirements (expected results)	18

6.3 STC-6-002: TLS	18

6.3.1 Test description and applicability	18

6.3.2 Test setup and configuration	19

6.3.3 Test procedure	19

6.3.4 Test requirements (expected results)	20

6.4 STC-6-003: DTLS	20

6.4.1 Test description and applicability	20

6.4.2 Test setup and configuration	20

6.4.3 Test procedure	21

6.4.4 Test requirements (expected results)	21

6.5 STC-6-004: IPSec	21

6.5.1 Test description and applicability	21

6.5.2 Test setup and configuration	22

6.5.3 Test procedure	22

6.5.4 Test requirements (expected results)	22

6.6 STC-6-005: OAuth 2.0	23

6.6.1 Test description and applicability	23

6.6.2 Test setup and configuration	23

6.6.3 Test procedure	24

6.6.4 Test requirements (expected results)	25

7 Common Network Security Tests for O-RAN components	26

7.1 Overview	26

7.2 Service Enumeration/ Network Boundary Examination	26

7.2.1 STC-7-7.2-001: Service Enumeration	26

7.3 Password-Based Authentication/PWDAUTH	27

7.3.1 STC-7-7.3-001: Brute Forcing	27

7.3.2 STC-7-7.3-002: Unauthorized Password Reset	28

7.3.3 STC-7-7.3-003: Password Policy Enforcement	29

7.4 Network Protocol Fuzzing	29

7.5 Denial of Service/Message Flooding	31

7.5.1 STC-7-7.5-001: Protocol, Application and Volumetric Based DDoS Attacks	31

8 System security evaluation for O-RAN component	33

8.1 Overview	33

8.2 System Vulnerability Scanning	33

8.2.1 STC-8-8.2-001: System Vulnerability Scanning	33

8.3 Data and Information Protection	33

8.4 System logging	34

9 Software security evaluation for O-RAN components	35

9.1 Overview	35

9.2 Open-Source Software Component Analysis	35

9.3 Binary Static Analysis	35

9.4 Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)	35

9.4.1 STC-9-9.4-001: SBOM Signature	35

9.4.2 STC-9-9.4-002: SBOM Data Fields	36

9.5 Software Image Signing and Verification	39

9.5.1 STC-9-9.5-001: Software Image Signing	39

9.5.2 STC-9-9.5-002: Software Signature Verification	39

10 ML security validation for O-RAN system	41

10.1 Overview	41

10.2 ML Data Poisoning	41

11 Security test of Open Fronthaul	42

11.1 Overview	42

11.2 Open Fronthaul Point-to-Point LAN Segment	42

11.2.1 STC-11-11.2-001: Authenticator Validation	42

11.2.2 STC-11-11.2-002: Supplicant Validation	43

12 Security test of O-RU	45

12.1 Overview	45

13 Security test of Near-RT RIC	46

13.1 Overview	46

13.2 Testing of IPSec on E2 interface	46

13.2.1 Test Description	46

14 Security test of xApps	47

14.1 Overview	47

14.2 xApp Signing and Verification	47

15 Security test of Non-RT RIC	48

15.1 Overview	48

15.2 Non-RT RIC	48

15.2.1 STC-15-15.2-001: Non-RT RIC OAuth 2.0 Resource Owner/Server	48

15.2.2 STC-15-15.2-002: Non-RT RIC OAuth 2.0 Client	48

15.2.3 STC-15-15.2-003: Non-RT RIC Framework OAuth 2.0	49

15.3 R1 interface	49

15.3.1 STC-15-15.3-001: TLS on R1 Interface	50

15.3.2 STC-15-15.3-002: mTLS on R1 Interface	50

15.3.3 STC-15-15.3-003: OAuth 2.0 on R1 Interface	51

15.4 A1 interface	51

15.4.1 STC-15-15.4-001: TLS on A1 Interface	51

15.4.2 STC-15-15.4-002: mTLS on A1 Interface	52

15.4.3 STC-15-15.4-003: OAuth 2.0 on A1 interface	52

16 Security test of rApps	54

16.1 Overview	54

16.2 rApp Signing and Verification	54

16.3 rApp Authorization	54

16.3.1 STC-16-16.3-001: rApp OAuth 2.0 Client	54

17 Security test of SMO	55

17.1 Overview	55

17.2 O1 Interface Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM) Validation	55

17.2.1 STC-17-17.2-001: O1 Interface NACM Validation	55

18 Security test of O-Cloud	57

18.1 Overview	57

19 Security test of VNF/CNF/PNF	58

19.1 Overview	58

	Annex A (informative): 	Example of Security Testing Tools / Toolset	59

	Annex B (informative): 	Template of test report	60

Revision history	63

History	64

List of figures

	Figure 51: Logical Architecture of O-RAN system	13

	Figure 61: Access Token request	24

	Figure 62: Service request	25

List of tables

	Table 51 Test and measurement equipment list	16

	Table Annex A1 List of sample open source security testing tools/toolset	59

Foreword

This Technical Specification (TS) has been produced by O-RAN Alliance.

Modal verbs terminology

In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the O-RAN Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).

"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in O-RAN deliverables except when used in direct citation.

	Scope

The present document provides description of the Security Tests, which validate security functions and configurations per security and security protocols requirements and are based on the priority of the risk analysis for O-RAN systems.

	References

	Normative references

References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or nonspecific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.

NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, O-RAN cannot guarantee their long term validity.

The following referenced documents are necessary for the application of the present document.

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Architecture Description 5.0”, July 2021

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Security Protocols Specification 4.0”, July 2022

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Remediation Analysis 4.0”, July 2022

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN End-to-End Test Specification 2.0”, July 2021

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Security Requirements 4.0”, July 2022

	3GPP TR 21.905: “Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications” (Release 16), December 2020

	3GPP TS 33.117: “Catalogue of General Security Assurance Requirements” (Release 16), December 2020

	3GPP TS 33.511: “Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for the next generation Node B (gNodeB) network product class” (Release 16), September 2020

	3GPP TS 33.216: “Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for the Evolved Node B (eNodeB) network product class” (Release 16), September 2020

	Openssh Security Vulnerabilities: https://www.cvedetails.com/vulnerability-list/vendor_id-97/product_id-585/Openbsd-Openssh.html

	"IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks--Port-Based Network Access Control," in IEEE Std 802.1X-2020 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.1X-2010 Incorporating IEEE Std 802.1Xbx-2014 and IEEE Std 802.1Xck-2018), vol., no., pp.1-289, 28 Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2020.9018454

	Microsoft: “Generating Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) with SPDX at Microsoft”, https://devblogs.microsoft.com/engineering-at-microsoft/generating-software-bills-of-materials-sboms-with-spdx-at-microsoft/, October 2021

	The United States Department of Commerce: “The Minimum Elements For a Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)”, July 2021

	Network Configuration Access Control Model, RFC 8341, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8341

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN O-Cloud Security Analysis Report v1.0”, March 2022

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Near-RT RIC and xApp Security Analysis Report v1.0”, March 2022

	O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN Non-RT RIC Security Analysis Report v1.0”, March 2022

	RFC 6749: The OAuth 2.0 Authorization framework. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749

	RFC 7519: JSON Web Token (JWT). https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519

	RFC 7515: JSON Web Signature (JWS). https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515

Informative references

References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or nonspecific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.

NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, ETSI cannot guarantee their long term validity.

The following referenced documents are not necessary for the application of the present document but they assist the user with regard to a particular subject area.

	Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations

	Terms

For the purposes of the present document, the terms and definitions given in 3GPP TR21.905[6], O-RAN Architecture Description[1], and the following in this section apply. A term defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same term, if any, in 3GPP TR21.905[6] and O-RAN Architecture Description[1].

A1: Interface between non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC to enable policy-driven guidance of Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.

E2:  Interface connecting the Near-RT RIC and one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, and one or more O-DUs.

RAN: Generally referred as Radio Access Network. In terms of this document, any component below Near-RT RIC per O-RAN architecture, including O-CU/O-DU/O-RU.

	Abbreviations

For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given 3GPP TR21.905[6], O-RAN Architecture Description[1], and the following in this section apply. A abbreviation defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same abbreviation, if any, in 3GPP TR21.905[6] and O-RAN Architecture Description[1].

AI/ML	Artificial Intelligence / Machine Learning

CMS/PKCS#7/CAdES	Cryptographic Message Syntax/Public-Key Cryptography Standards/CMS Advanced Electronic Signatures

CNF	Cloud Native Function

DTLS	Datagram Transport Layer Security

DUT	Device Under Test

eCPRI	Enhanced Common Public Radio Interface

FTP	File Transfer Protocol

FTPS	File Transfer Protocol Secure

IPSEC	Internet Protocol Security

JSF	JSON Signature Format

JSON	JavaScript Object Notation

JWT	JSON Web Token

JWS	JSON Web Signature

KPI	Key Performance Indicator

mTLS	Mutual Trasport Layer Security

NACM	Network Configuration Access Control Model

NETCONF	Network Configuration Protocol

NTIA	National Telecommunications and Information Administration - United States Department of Commerce

OAuth	Open Authentication

PDCP	Packet Data Convergence Protocol

PNF	Physical Network Function

PTP	Precision Timing Protocol

RBAC	Role-based Access Control

RDF	Resource Description Format

RIC	O-RAN RAN Intelligent Controller

SBOM	Software Bill of Materials

SDLC	Software Development Lifecycle

SSH	Secure Shell

SUT	System Under Test

TLS	Transport Layer Security

VNF	Virtualized Network Function

WAS	Web Application Security

XML	Extensible Markup Language

YAML	YAML Ain’t Markup Language

	Objectives and scope

This security test specification is focused on:

Validating the implementation of security requirements and security protocols specified in [5] and [2].

Emulating security attacks against the O-RAN component(s), interfaces, and the system to measure the robustness of the O-RAN system and the service impact(s).

Validating the effectiveness of the security mitigation method(s) to protect the O-RAN system and the services it offers.

This security test specification is based on the priority of the risk assessment of the O-RAN security threats and security requirements of the O-RAN system.

	Testing methodology and configuration

This chapter describes the common testing methods and configurations used in the subsequent chapters. To ensure fair and comparable test results among various test campaigns, consistent test setups shall be utilized. This security test specification describes the test conditions, methodologies, and procedures, so that the test can be reproduced if needed, and the test results can be used for comparison or reference purposes.

	DUT / SUT

Figure 51: Logical Architecture of O-RAN system

Figure 51 illustrates the O-RAN components, interfaces, and overall system.

As specified in [1], the following O-RAN components and interfaces shall be the DUT or SUT addressed in this security test specification.

O-RAN components:

Network functions and applications

Service Management and Orchestration (SMO)

Non-RT RIC and rApps

Near-RT RIC and xApps

O-CU-CP/UP

O-DU

O-RU

O-eNB

Cloud computing platform

O-Cloud comprising a collection of physical infrastructure nodes that meet O-RAN requirements to host the relevant O-RAN functions (such as Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, and O-DU), the supporting software components (such as Operating System, Virtual Machine Monitor, Container Runtime, etc.) and the appropriate management and orchestration functions.

Maintained interfaces by O-RAN:

A1 Interface between Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC to enable policy-driven guidance of Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.

O1 Interface connecting the SMO to the Near-RT RIC, one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, and one or more O-DUs.

O2 Interface between the SMO and the O-Cloud

E2 Interface connecting the Near-RT RIC and one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, one or more O-DUs, and one or more O-eNBs.

Open Fronthaul CUS-Plane Interface between O-RU and O-DU

Open Fronthaul M-Plane Interface between O-RU and O-DU as well as between O-RU and SMO

	Test Setup

Please refer to the security test cases listed in the following chapters for their specific test setups.

	Test and measurement equipment and tools

 The following table lists test and measurement equipment required for the security tests in this document.

Test tool

Description

Commercial UE and/or UE emulator

A commercial UE or UE emulator shall be used to establish stateful end-to-end connection and to generate or receive data traffic.

The commercial UE used in this context as a test tool is typically a UE which is designed for commercial or testing applications with certain test and diagnostic functions enabled for test and measurements purposes. Such test and diagnostic functions should not affect the performance.

This commercial UE requires an (emulated) SIM card which is pre-provisioned with subscriber profiles. A UE emulator or multiple commercial UEs can be used in multi-UE test scenarios requiring multiple UEs sessions. The UE shall connect to the SUT either via RF cables or via an over the air (OTA) connection. In a lab environment, the UE shall be placed inside an RF shielded box/room to avoid interference from external signals.

A logging tool connected to the UE shall be used to capture measurements and KPI logs for test validation and reporting.

4G/5G Core or Core emulator

A 4G/5G core or core emulator shall be used to terminate 4G/5G NAS sessions, and to support core network procedures required for RAN (SUT) testing. 4G/5G core or core emulator shall support end-to-end connection and data transfer between Application server and commercial UE/UE emulator.

Application (traffic) server

An application (traffic) server shall be used as an endpoint for generation and/or termination of data traffic streams to/from commercial UE(s)/UE emulator. The application server shall be capable of generating data traffic for the services under test.

Network impairment emulator

A network impairment emulator shall be used for tests which require insertion of impairment (packet delay and/or jitter) at the network interface (e.g. OpenFH).

Packet generation tool / DoS emulator

A packet generation tool / Denial of Service (DoS) emulator shall be used for DoS traffic generation of security tests. The tool shall support crafting network traffic over the following network protocols: Ethernet, IP, UDP, TCP, PTP, eCPRI, TLS, HTTP/HTTPS.

Packet capture tool

A packet capture tool shall be used to capture samples of data traffic for validation, analysis, and troubleshooting. It may be used to capture samples of legitimate traffic, which then may be used as templates for fuzzing attacks. The tool shall support capturing network traffic over the following network protocols: Ethernet, IP, UDP, TCP, PTP, eCPRI, TLS, QUIC, HTTP/HTTPS.

Network tap

A network tap shall be a hardware or software device which provides access and visibility to the data flowing across a computer network.

Fuzzing tool

A protocol fuzzing tool shall be used for unexpected protocol input generation of security tests. The tool shall support mutating and replaying of captured network traffic over the following network protocols: Ethernet, IP, UDP, TCP, PTP, eCPRI, TLS, HTTP/HTTPS.

Vulnerability scanning tool

A vulnerability scanning tool shall be used for blind exploitation of well-known vulnerabilities during security tests. The tool may rely on cyclically updated database of known vulnerabilities based on Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) and should support scanning network services running on TCP/IP stack of protocols.

NFV benchmarking and resource exhaustion tool

A Network Function Virtualization (NFV) tool shall be used for O-Cloud system performance measurement and resource exhaustion type of DoS attack generation. This tool shall be capable of supporting any types of O-Cloud environment (public or private) with testing VNF(s) and/or CNF(s).

SSH audit tool

An SSH audit tool shall be used to verify the following properties: version of protocol, cipher suites, and known vulnerabilities in server and client SSH software.

TLS scanning tool

A TLS scanning tool shall be used to verify the following properties: version of protocol, cipher suites, and known vulnerabilities in server TLS software.

DTLS scanning tool

A DTLS scanning tool shall be used to verify the following properties: version of protocol, cipher suites, and known vulnerabilities in server DTLS software.

IKE scanning tool

An IKE scanning tool shall be used to verify the following properties: version of protocol, cipher suites, and known vulnerabilities in server IPsec software.

Software image signing tool

A Software image signing tool shall be used to digitally sign and verify the software image, e.g. xApps or O-RAN component delivered by a software producer/provider.

Table 51 Test and measurement equipment list

	Test report

Tests should be described in the test report with sufficient detail to allow the tests to be reproducible by different parties and to enable comparison. A template for a complete test report is found in Annex B and may be used. Photos and screenshots should also be taken as part of the test report to illustrate the test environment. Additional parameters are specified in the description of each test in the subsequent chapters.

	Assumptions

void

	Security Protocol Validation

	Overview

This chapter contains test cases to validate implementation of security protocols against O-RAN security requirements in [2] and [5].

	STC-6-001: SSH Server & Client

Requirement Name: Network Security Protocol - SSH

Requirement Reference:  Clause 4.1, O-RAN Security Protocols Specification 4.0 [2]

Requirement Description: Robust protocol implementation with adequately strong cipher suites is being required for SSH

Threat References: T-O-RAN-05

O-RAN Component References: O-DU, O-RU

	Test description and applicability

The purpose of the test is to verify implementation of the secure communication protocol SSH as specified in [2].

The following properties shall be validated on both: server and client side:

Supported version of SSH protocol (v2)

Robustness of cryptographic algorithms used for/as:

Host key algorithms (also known as public key signature algorithms)

Symmetric algorithms for encrypting data (also known as symmetric ciphers)

Key exchange algorithms

Message authentication codes (MACs)

Lack of existence of well-known vulnerabilities in leveraged SSH client and server-side implementations (e.g. OpenSSH) according to Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) listed at [10].

	Test setup and configuration

This test shall be executed against both server and client endpoints of communication.

Test prerequisites:

 SSH audit tool with capabilities as defined in Chapter 5.3

Network access to SSH server services from tester’s PC (Used for server-side testing)

OS level (shell) access to hosts acting as SSH clients (Used for client-side testing)

	Test procedure

Server-side testing:

Run SSH audit tool in server audit mode against each SSH server service from tester’s PC

Compare the tool’s output with the list of approved SSH protocols and algorithms (for host key, symmetric encryption, key exchange, and MACs) as defined by Security Protocols Specifications

Review the tool’s output for reported vulnerabilities

Client-side testing:

Run SSH audit tool on each SSH clients in client audit mode

Compare the tool’s output with the list of approved SSH protocols and algorithms (for host key, symmetric encryption, key exchange, and MACs) as defined by Security Protocols Specifications

Review the tool’s output for reported vulnerabilities

	Test requirements (expected results)

SSH version (v2) support with no older versions enabled.

All supported SSH algorithms (for host key, symmetric encryption, key exchange, and MACs) are explicitly allowed by [2].

No well-known SSH vulnerabilities found.

Providing evidence (logs, results, report, screenshots, …)

	STC-6-002: TLS

Requirement Name: Network Security Protocol - TLS

Requirement Reference: Clause 4.2, O-RAN Security Protocols Specification 4.0 [2]

Requirement Description: Support TLS v1.2 and/or TLS v1.3 with protocol profiles

Threat References: T-O-RAN-05, T-SMO-01

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, O-Cloud

	Test description and applicability

The purpose of the test is to verify implementation of the secure communication protocol TLS as specified in [2].

The following properties shall be validated for the TLS service on O-RAN component(s):

Supported version of TLS v1.2 or TLS v1.3

Support of mutual authentication

TLS protocol profiles required and/or recommended in Clause 4.2.2 of [2]

Lack of existence of TLS well-known vulnerabilities in TLS implementations (e.g. OpenSSL) according to Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) listed [10]

	Test setup and configuration

This test shall be executed against O-RAN component with TLS service enabled as the DUT.

Test prerequisites:

TLS scanning tool with client certificate(s) installed;

DUT with CA cert signing the client certificate(s)

Network access to DUT

	Test procedure

Protocol scanning

Run TLS scanning tool against DUT for detection of:

TLS version

Cipher suites

Elliptic curves

Certificate type

Diffie-Hellman groups

Compression methods

TLS vulnerability scan (i.e. compression, CCS injection, Heartbleed, ROBOT, …) Compare the test result/report with the list of approved TLS versions and profiles as defined by Security Protocols Specification

Review the test result/report for vulnerabilities

Mutual Authentication

Run TLS scanning tool with TLS v1.2 and valid client certificate against DUT with mutual authentication enabled to verify the establishment of the TLS session after successful authentication

Run TLS scanning tool with TLS v1.2 and invalid client certificate (including but not limited to expired certificate, missing field certificate, untrusted CA signed certificate, …) against DUT with mutual authentication enabled to verify the failed attempt of the TLS session establishment due to certificate validation

Run TLS scanning tool with TLS v1.3 and valid client certificate against DUT with mutual authentication enabled to verify the establishment of the TLS session after successful authentication

Run TLS scanning tool with TLS v1.3 and invalid client certificate (including but not limited to expired certificate, missing field certificate, untrusted CA signed certificate, …) against DUT with mutual authentication enabled to verify the failed attempt of the TLS session establishment due to certificate validation

	Test requirements (expected results)

TLS versions (1.2 and 1.3) support with no older version(s) enabled.

TLS protocol profiles support without default cryptographically insecure ciphers support

No well-known TLS vulnerabilities found

Providing evidence (logs, results, report, screenshots, …)

Mutual authentication support for TLS versions (1.2 and 1.3)

	STC-6-003: DTLS

Requirement Name: Network Security Protocol - DTLS

Requirement Reference: Clause 4.4, O-RAN Security Protocols Specification 4.0 [2]

Requirement Description: Support DTLS v1.2

Threat References: T-O-RAN-01

O-RAN Component References: Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU

	Test description and applicability

The purpose of the test is to verify implementation of the secure communication protocol DTLS as specified in [2].

The following properties shall be validated for the DTLS service on O-RAN component(s):

Supported version of DTLS v1.2

DTLS protocol profiles specs listed in Clause 4.4.2 of [2]

Lack of existence of TLS well-known vulnerability

	Test setup and configuration

This test shall be executed against O-RAN component with DTLS service enabled as the DUT.

Test prerequisites:

DTLS scanning tool

Network access to DUT

	Test procedure

Run DTLS scanning tool against DUT for detection of:

DTLS version

Cipher suites

Elliptic curves

Certificate type

Diffie-Hellman groups

Compression methods

DTLS vulnerability scan (i.e. compression, CCS injection, Heartbleed, ROBOT, …) Compare the test result/report with the list of approved DTLS versions and profiles as defined by Security Protocols Specifications

Review the test result/report for vulnerabilities

	Test requirements (expected results)

DTLS version (1.2) support with no older version(s) enabled.

DTLS protocol profiles support without default cryptographically insecure ciphers support

No well-known DTLS vulnerabilities found

Providing evidence (logs, results, report, screenshots, …)

	STC-6-004: IPSec

Requirement Name: Network Security Protocol - IPSec

Requirement Reference: Clause 4.5, O-RAN Security Protocols Specification 4.0 [2]

Requirement Description: Support IPSec tunnel mode with confidentiality, integrity, authentication, and anti-replay protection.

Threat References: T-O-RAN-01

O-RAN Component References: Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU

	Test description and applicability

The purpose of the test is to verify implementation of the secure communication protocol IPsec.

The following properties shall be validated for the IPsec service on O-RAN component(s):

ESP in tunnel mode

Supported version of IKE v2

IPsec capabilities listed in Clause 4.5.1.1 of [2]

	Test setup and configuration

This test shall be executed against O-RAN component with IPsec service enabled as the DUT.

Test prerequisites:

IKE scanning tool

Network access to DUT

	Test procedure

Run IKE scanning tool against DUT for detection of:

ESP Encryption Transforms

ESP Authentication Transforms

Diffie-Hellman groups

Certificate type

Review the test result/report for vulnerabilities

	Test requirements (expected results)

IKE version (v2) support with no older version(s) enabled.

Supported ESP Encryption Transforms shall include:

ENCR_NULL

ENCR_AES_CBC

ENCR_AES_GCM_16

Supported ESP Authentication Transforms shall include:

AUTH_AES_128_GMAC

AUTH_HMAC_SHA2_256_128

Supported Diffie-Hellman groups shall include:

DH group 19 (256-bit ECP group)

If certificates are used, their format shall be X.509v3

	STC-6-005: OAuth 2.0

Requirement Name: Authorization based on OAuth 2.0 shall be enforced for O-RAN application’s API service request to O-RAN resource provider.

Requirement Reference: Clause 4.7, O-RAN Security Protocol Specifications 4.0 [2]

Requirement Description: O-RAN OAuth 2.0 based authorization including resource registration, application access token request and token based service access request

Threat References: T-O-RAN-05, T-NEAR-RT-04, T-rAPP-04

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, xAPP, rAPP

	Test description and applicability

The purpose of the test is to verify implementation of the authorization of O-RAN application’s (e.g. xAPP) API service request to O-RAN resource provider (e.g. Near-RT RIC) based on OAuth 2.0 as specified in [2]

 The following properties shall be validated:

Supported version of OAuth 2.0

Application access token request process

Mutual TLS authentication is required

Token based service access request process

Mutual TLS authentication is required

	Test setup and configuration

This test shall be executed against O-RAN component(s)/application(s) requesting or providing service(s) via API call.

Test prerequisites:

OAuth client – Client/Application as DUT

Resource server – Resource owner/provider as DUT

OAuth server – OAuth 2.0 Authorization Server (real or emulated)

OAuth client registration can be a manual process with client profile pre-provisioned on the OAuth server based on client certificate’s subject alternative name field

Resource server registered with the OAuth server for its supported API service(s)

This process can be a manual or automatic process preceding with resource server authentication

The API service profile(s) should follow the definition of O-RAN specifications

TLS service enabled on the OAuth client, Resource server and OAuth server with all the required keys, root and/or immediate (if necessary) CA certificates required for mutual TLS authentication procedure

IP connectivity in btw Authorization Server, Resource provider and Client/Application

Network access to Authorization Server, Resource provider and Client/Application by the tester

	Test procedure

The following test steps and test scenarios shall be followed for the validation:

Application access token request process validation

Application access token request process with valid client certificate and parameters

O-RAN application as OAuth client makes the access token request towards OAuth server over secured TLS communication session with mutual TLS authentication;

Figure 61: Access Token request

Verify the session is established between the OAuth client and OAuth server, and the access token request is processed with a successful response with digitally signed JSON Web Signature (JWS) as described in RFC 7515 [20] by the OAuth server.

Application access token request process with wrong client certificate

O-RAN application as OAuth client shall send the access token request towards OAuth server over secured TLS communication session with mutual TLS authentication;

Verify the session establishment in between the OAuth client and server is not possible.

Application access token request process with incorrect parameters

O-RAN application as OAuth client shall send the access token request with incorrect parameters towards OAuth server over secured TLS communication session with mutual TLS authentication;

Verify the session is established between the OAuth client and OAuth server, and the access token request is processed with a failed response by the OAuth server with error code defined in RFC 6749 7[18].

Token based service request process validation

Token based service access request process with valid access token

O-RAN application as OAuth client shall send an API service request towards O-RAN resource provider using the access token obtained as a response to access token request over a secured TLS communication session with mutual TLS authentication;

Figure 62: Service request

Verify the session is established between the application and resource provider, and the service request is processed with a response by the resource provider.

Token based service access request process with incorrect access token

O-RAN application as OAuth client shall send an API service request towards O-RAN resource provider using an incorrect access token over a secured TLS communication session with mutual TLS authentication;

Verify the session is established between the application and resource provider, and the service request is processed with a failed response (401) by the resource provider.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The O-RAN component/application shall be able to execute API service(s) call with OAuth 2.0 based authorization.

	Common Network Security Tests for O-RAN components

	Overview

This chapter contains a set of security evaluations that are performed from outside and inside of the network function in a network capacity. It is used to measure the external exposure and risk(s) of the function in place and leverages common techniques used in cyber security to evaluate the risk(s) device under test faces or has.

The objects in scope of these network-based security tests are SMO, Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, O-eNB and O-Cloud.

	Service Enumeration/ Network Boundary Examination

	STC-7-7.2-001: Service Enumeration

Requirement Name: Network protocols and services

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.3.3, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: A list of network protocols and services supported on the O-RAN component shall be clearly documented by its vendor. Unused protocols shall be disabled.

Threat References: T-O-RAN-01, T-O-RAN-02

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, O-Cloud

	Test description and applicability

Service enumeration is the discovery of network services that are managed or handled by the DUT. Service enumeration for O-RAN component first requires both internal and external "port scans" to discover ports that are servicing application and network protocols.

TCP Port Scanning

Sending a TCP SYN packet to each port. A response with SYN/ACK indicates "port open"

SCTP Port Scanning

Sending a SCTP INIT packet to each possible port. A response with INIT_ACK indicates "port open"

UDP Port Scanning

Sending a UDP packet containing data to each port. A non-response of ICMP Port Unreachable indicates that a service MIGHT be listening.

After each set of ports is scanned, a set of service discovery protocol handshake attempts should be sent to validate if a service is listening or available. For each port, the most likely protocol(s) should be sent to validate if they are present and flagged. If there is a non-match, the data received should be reported in both hexadecimal form and ASCII printable. A few examples:

A TCP port on port 80 is discovered as "open". An HTTP 1.1 GET should be sent, as well as a HTTP2 GET

UDP Port 69 was deemed open. A TFTP read for a random file should be sent, looking for a TFTP ERROR Packet.

SCTP port 38412 was discovered as open. A NG Reset packet should be sent to that port looking for the appropriate response.

	Test setup and configuration

This test shall use an allow-list of network services provided by DUT. The allow-list is used to compare against the list of actual identified network service(s) on the DUT produced as a result of the test.

The O-RAN component(s) listed in the reference above shall be the DUT. The allow-list shall be provided by vendor(s) of DUT prior to the test.

	Test procedure

Scan the IP address of the DUT for listening TCP, UDP, and SCTP ports.

For each port determined to be listening, send the expected network handshake typically used on that port, and identify the service offered.

	Test requirements (expected results)

A list of enumerated ports and services on the DUT. Anything that is not included in the allow-list should have an explanation provided as to why it is available and what purpose(s) it serves.

	Password-Based Authentication/PWDAUTH

	STC-7-7.3-001: Brute Forcing

Requirement Name: Password-Based Authentication

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.3.7, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: Password brute-force protection mechanism is present on the DUT

Threat References: T-O-RAN-02, T-O-RAN-03, T-O-RAN-05, T-O-RAN-06

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, O-Cloud

	Test description and applicability

For every management plane protocol discovered that has an authentication mechanism available, it shall be brute forced with a reasonable password database, using credentials seen in use from rap sheet as well as from common password cracking databases, such as rockyou.

Verify that mechanisms are implemented to prevent exhaustive password cracking attempts, e.g. increasing the delay after each unsuccessful password entry. The test case is applicable to any remote management (e.g. SSH) and local (non-remote) Web UI logins.

	Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the O-RAN component listed in the reference above with an identified listening service that has an authentication module (ex: SSH, HTTP Auth).

	Test procedure

Using a common set of usernames and password combinations, continually connect and guess user/password. Also, a common set of frequently seen SSH keys caused by poor entropy shall be used.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The DUT shall deny all requests and not have a commonly used password available for management.

	STC-7-7.3-002: Unauthorized Password Reset

Requirement Name: Password-Based Authentication

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.3.7, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: Out-of-band password recovery mechanism absent on DUT

Threat References: T-O-RAN-02, T-O-RAN-03, T-O-RAN-05, T-O-RAN-06

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, O-Cloud

	Test description and applicability

This test verifies whether any out-of-band mechanisms exists (and is exposed), which can be used to circumvent, disable, or reset the password. In the case of any Web UI accessible via the Ethernet interface, test whether it is possible to recover the user password using a hardware switch or via any other applicable means.

	Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the O-RAN component listed in the reference above with an identified listening service that has an authentication module (ex: SSH, HTTP Auth).

	Test procedure

Verify whether any out-of-band (OOB) mechanisms exist and are exposed, which can be used to circumvent, disable, or reset any admin password(s). If any Web UI is accessible via the ethernet interface, this test case shall also determine whether it is possible to recover the user password using a hardware switch or via any other means applicable.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The DUT shall not have any out-of-band password recovery mechanisms supported and/or enabled. Please note that it is acceptable to reset the Web UI to the factory default password via a physical switch or via authenticated user access to the Web UI, providing that this process erases all user configuration and data.

	STC-7-7.3-003: Password Policy Enforcement

Requirement Name: Password-Based Authentication

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.3.7, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: Secure password policy is supported and enforced on the DUT

Threat References: T-O-RAN-02, T-O-RAN-03, T-O-RAN-05, T-O-RAN-06

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, O-Cloud

	Test description and applicability

Verify that policies on acceptable password values are enforced. Applicable to remote password-based (e.g. SSH) and Web UI login.

	Test setup and configuration

 DUT shall be the O-RAN component listed in the reference above that has a password policy running as part of the configuration of the component. This policy is applied either on the firmware, operating system and/or application levels.

	Test procedure

Test the resistance of the DUT against brute force password guessing using available password dictionaries by evaluating the length, complexity, reuse, change frequency, and aging requirements of passwords.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The DUT shall deny usage of all passwords which are not compliant with the password policy enforced. The password policy requirements shall be determined by Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) baselines and security best practice

	Network Protocol Fuzzing

Fuzzing is an automated process of sending invalid or random inputs to a SUT to cause it to malfunction or crash.

Fuzzing is effective for finding vulnerabilities because while most modern programs have extensive input fields, the test coverage of these areas is relatively small. Even though this process can be a powerful capability to ensure robustness, it needs to be sufficiently defined and implemented throughout the system development lifecycle to be helpful and achieve the required results in a multi-vendor environment.

While traditional fuzzing techniques involve fuzzing piece(s) of software and generating inputs through command line or input files, fuzzing telecommunication network protocols tends to be different, requiring sending information via network ports. Furthermore, the complex nature of network protocols in the SUT resulting from how they are layered over each other adds to the challenges of fuzzing such SUTs.

In the case of O-RAN SUT, fuzzing cover protocols rather than application-specific (web applications and services, etc.). The following are examples of the protocols that fuzzing will cover;

General Transport Protocols

SCTP

IP

TCP

UDP

SSH

HTTP

HTTP/2

and

O-RAN Specific Protocols

NETCONF

E1AP

E2AP

A1

CTI

eCPRI

PTP

It is anticipated that many O-RAN components utilize common software frameworks used for the lower-level general communication. In this case it should be evaluated if these General Transport Protocols are being tested in extensive Fuzzing tests in other activities and can therefore be considered to have lower risk profiles compared to the O-RAN Specific Protocols with less testing in the general industry.

Many of the O-RAN specific protocols are state- machine based protocols that can have multiple end points served at the same time, e.g. the protocol needs to be tested in scale to understand if possible memory leaks or other similar aspects is available that could lead to buffer overflows (opening up for possible code execution) or software crashes of the O-RAN specific software.

Fuzzing on the M-Plane protocol inside the Configuration of the O-RAN Fronthaul can be a possible significant area as this is combining multiple technologies from many domains into a single solution. In order for the Fuzzing to be time and resource efficient, it is important that this Fuzzing is protocol and state machine aware so that the Fuzzing can focus on the relevant aspects of the SUT representing the most significant risk exposure. Further effectiveness can be achieved if the Fuzzing capability is able to intelligently respond to the SUT behavior. The Fuzzing tool should be able to both perform test with and without access to relevant credentials. Many possible vulnerabilities would be present on the inside of the authenticated session of the management protocols and would lead to escalation of privileges.

In order to identify the possible risk for memory leaks, Denial of Service (DoS) or other similar aspects a robust logging of the underlying platform (hardware and software), the virtualization or container platform and the O-RAN function, the logging needs to be detailed enough to evaluate the trends early but not intrusive to degrade the performance of the platform and lead to inaccurate results.

As general guidance, vendors and operators running fuzzing tests aim to document the list of all of the protocols of the SUTs reachable externally on an IP-based interface, together with indications of whether adequate available robustness and fuzz testing tools have been used against them. The tool's name, their unambiguous version (also for plug-ins if applicable), user settings, and the relevant output evidenced and should be documented. Additionally, any input causing unspecified, undocumented, or unexpected behavior and a description of this behavior should be highlighted in the testing documentation.

Since fuzzing test cases are not exhaustive and difficult to define and replicate, it's likely that test results even from testing the same set of protocols by different vendors may end up resulting in different outputs. So further effort and time needs to be invested in fuzzing activities until a satisfactory approach based on the vendor's or/and operators adopted risk-based model is satisfied.

	Denial of Service/Message Flooding

	STC-7-7.5-001: Protocol, Application and Volumetric Based DDoS Attacks

Requirement Name:  Robustness against Volumetric DDoS Attack

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.3.5, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: O-RAN system/major interface(s) are robust against volumetric DDoS attack.

Threat References: T-O-RAN-04, T-O-RAN-09, T-SMO-03

O-RAN Component References: O-RAN system / major interface(s)

	Test description and applicability

Each authentication or control plane module shall be tested to validate how handling of large amounts of requests is done, similar to what is seen from denial of service(DoS) or/and distributed denial of service(DDoS) attempts, either on purpose (malicious) or because of network/operator error. DoS/DDoS attacks may come in these forms: Protocol layer attacks (SYN Floods, Ping of Death, Smurf DDoS), Volume based attacks (UDP floods, ICMP floods) and Application layer attacks (GET/POST floods, low-and-slow attacks, attacks that target Apache, Windows or OpenBSD).

	Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the O-RAN system with access to its major interfaces.

	Test procedure

Set up a call flow that will send repeated requests for authentication that fails at an increasing rate over time. Mark the failure point of receiving rejection messages.

Set up a call flow that will send repeated requests for authentication that is permitted at an increasing rate over time. Mark the failure point of receiving acceptance messages.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The network function will fail to serve requests at some point. The expected result is that it will not crash or fail to service requests when dropped back to a more normal rate.

	System security evaluation for O-RAN component

	Overview

This chapter contains security evaluations to be performed at the system level of an O-RAN component, covering vulnerability scanning, data and information protection and system logging.

The objects in scope of these system security evaluation are SMO, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU and O-RU.

	System Vulnerability Scanning

	STC-8-8.2-001: System Vulnerability Scanning

Requirement Name: Robustness of OS and Applications

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.3.6, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: Operating System (OS) and applications vulnerability scan of O-RAN component

Threat References: T-O-RAN-01

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU

	Test description and applicability

Perform vulnerability scanning to ensure that there are no known vulnerabilities on the O-RAN component, both in the Operating System (OS) and the applications (e.g. web app from third-parties software) installed, that can be detected by means of automatic testing tools via the IP enabled network interfaces, or to identify the know vulnerabilities on the O-RAN component and have a clear mitigation plan for the ones of high severity.

	Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the O-RAN component with IP enabled network interfaces.

	Test procedure

Run the vulnerability scanning tool and check the potential known vulnerabilities existing on the O-RAN component OS and applications levels.

The severity level of the existing vulnerabilities shall be evaluated.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The O-RAN component shall be free from known vulnerabilities or there are security controls in place to mitigate the exploits associated with the vulnerabilities of high severity.

	Data and Information Protection

void

	System logging

void

	Software security evaluation for O-RAN components

	Overview

This chapter contains a set of software security evaluations of an O-RAN component, covering Software Lifecycle Management.

The objects in scope of these software security evaluation are SMO, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU and O-RU.

	Open-Source Software Component Analysis

void

	Binary Static Analysis

void

	Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)

	STC-9-9.4-001: SBOM Signature

Requirement Name: A digital signature must be provided for the SBOM.

Requirement Reference: Clause 6.3, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: REQ-SBOM-008, REQ-SBOM-011

Threat References: T-O-RAN-09

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU

	Test description and applicability

Open RAN software producers shall provide the SBOM for every O-RAN software delivery, including patches, to the network operator. SBOM shall be digitally signed.

	Test setup and configuration

SBOM file shall be in the format specified in REQ-SBOM-011 [2]

	Test procedure

Ensure the SBOM is provided with a digital signature in the format as described below. Verify SBOM digital signature is valid using the software provider’s public key or certificate. Depending on the format of the SBOM, there are various ways how to include and verify the digital signature of the SBOM. Below, the digital signature methods are detailed.

SPDX

YAML, RDF and tag data: The signature shall be in a separate file from the SPDX file (Example: foo.spdx has foo.spdx.sig containing it's signature). Digital signature format shall be CMS/PKCS#7/CAdES.

XML: XML Signature 2.0

JSON: JSON Web Signature (JWS), and JSON Signature Format (JSF).

CycloneDX

XML: XML Signature 2.0

JSON: JSON Web Signature (JWS), and JSON Signature Format (JSF).

SWID

XML: XML Signature 2.0

	Test requirements (expected results)

Digital signature of the SBOM shall be valid.

	STC-9-9.4-002: SBOM Data Fields

Requirement Name: Data fields must be according to NTIA guidance

Requirement Reference: Clause 6.3, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: REQ-SBOM-002, REQ-SBOM-011

Threat References: T-O-RAN-09

O-RAN Component References: SMO, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU

	Test description and applicability

Open RAN software producers shall provide the SBOM for every O-RAN software delivery to the network operator, including patches. Minimum set of the data fields shall be present. Purpose of the test is to verify that the minimum set of the data fields are present in SBOM.

	Test setup and configuration

SBOM file format shall be as specified in REQ-SBOM-011 [2].

	Test procedure

 Run the SBOM check tool and verify that there is minimum set of data fields present in SBOM depending on the SBOM format used.

Minimum set of data fields for SPDX [12]:

NTIA field

NTIA description

SPDX 2.2.1 field

Supplier Name

The name of an entity that creates, defines, and identifies components

PackageSupplier

Component Name

Designation assigned to a unit of software defined by the original supplier

PackageName

Version of the Component

Identifier used by the supplier to specify a change in software from a previously identified version

PackageVersion

Other Unique Identifiers

Other identifiers that are used to identify a component, or serve as a look-up key for relevant databases

SPDXID (Package SPDX Identifier)

Dependency Relationship

Characterizing the relationship that an upstream component X is included in software Y

Relationship: CONTAINS

Author of SBOM Data

The name of the entity that creates the SBOM data for this component

Creator

Timestamp

Record of the date and time of the SBOM data assembly

Created

Minimum set of data fields for CycloneDX [13]:

NTIA field

NTIA description

CycloneDX field

Supplier Name

The name of an entity that creates, defines, and identifies components

publisher

Component Name

Designation assigned to a unit of software defined by the original supplier

name

Version of the Component

Identifier used by the supplier to specify a change in software from a previously identified version

version

Other Unique Identifiers

Other identifiers that are used to identify a component, or serve as a look-up key for relevant databases

bom/serialNumber and component/bom-ref

Dependency Relationship

Characterizing the relationship that an upstream component X is included in software Y

(Nested assembly/subassembly and/or dependency graphs)

Author of SBOM Data

The name of the entity that creates the SBOM data for this component

bom-descriptor:metadata/
manufacture/contact

Timestamp

Record of the date and time of the SBOM data assembly

timestamp

Minimum set of data fields for SWID [13]:

NTIA field

NTIA description

SWID tag

Supplier Name

The name of an entity that creates, defines, and identifies components

<Entity> @role
(softwareCreator/publisher),
@name

Component Name

Designation assigned to a unit of software defined by the original supplier

<softwareIdentity> @name

Version of the Component

Identifier used by the supplier to specify a change in software from a previously identified version

<softwareIdentity> @version

Other Unique Identifiers

Other identifiers that are used to identify a component, or serve as a look-up key for relevant databases

<softwareIdentity> @tagID

Dependency Relationship

Characterizing the relationship that an upstream component X is included in software Y

<Link> @rel, @href

Author of SBOM Data

The name of the entity that creates the SBOM data for this component

<Entity> @role (tagCreator), @name

Timestamp

Record of the date and time of the SBOM data assembly

-

This test should be part of the O-RAN software producer’s Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC).

	Test requirements (expected results)

Minimum set of data fields shall be present.

	Software Image Signing and Verification

	STC-9-9.5-001: Software Image Signing

Requirement Name: Any software image(s) of O-RAN components and/or apps shall be digitally signed by its provider for distribution and by the operator for internal publishing.

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.1.3 & 5.1.8, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: REQ-SEC-XAPP-1, REQ-SEC-OCLOUD-IMG-2, REQ-SEC-OCLOUD-IMG-3

Threat References: T-IMG-01, T-VM-C-02, T-Near-RT-01, T-Near-RT-02, T-xAPP-02, T-rAPP-05

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, xAPP, rAPP

	Test description and applicability

Open RAN software producer/provider shall provide digitally signed image for its delivery, including new version and/or patches, to the O-RAN operator. O-RAN operator shall digitally sign the verified image delivered by the software producer for publishing into its catalog visible to SMO.

	Test setup and configuration

Software image ready for signing.

	Test procedure

Manually or using software signing service digitally sign the image for distribution by software producer or internally published by O-RAN operator. The following steps are to be followed:

Generate key-pair: ephemeral key pair (prime256v1) is preferred

private key (and public key if certificate is used) deletion asap

Request for Signing Certificate: Optional, preferred short-lived certificate

Image hash and signing: SHA256 or stronger

Upload image and its digital signature(s) for distribution or publish.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The provider’s digital signature of the software image shall be present in the image repository for distribution from software producer; and operator digital signature of the software image shall be present in the catalogue published by the O-RAN operator.

	STC-9-9.5-002: Software Signature Verification

Requirement Name: Any software image(s) of O-RAN component(s) and/or app(s) shall be verified for its signature(s) by the operator for onboarding and/or registration process.

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.1.3 & 5.1.8, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: REQ-SEC-XAPP-2, REQ-SEC-OCLOUD-IMG-5

Threat References: T-IMG-01, T-VM-C-02, T-Near-RT-01, T-Near-RT-02, T-xAPP-02

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, O-RU, xApp, rApp

	Test description and applicability

O-RAN software image(s) distributed by the software producer/provider shall be authenticated by the O-RAN operator during the onboarding process with its signature verified. Both provider and operator signatures of the O-RAN software image(s) from the operator’s catalogue shall be verified during the registration/instantiation process.

	Test setup and configuration

Digitally signed software image with shared necessary digital certificates or public key shall be validated, e.g. root CA certificate, any intermediate or RA certificates.

	Test procedure

Manually or using software signing service the signature(s) of the signed software image distributed by software producer and internally published by O-RAN operator shall be verified. For operator’s image registration/instantiation, operator signature of the software image verification shall be executed first, followed by provider signature verification.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The provider signature verification for software image onboarding shall be successful. The operator and provider signatures verification for image registration/instantiation shall be successful.

	ML security validation for O-RAN system

	Overview

AI/ML technologies and models are adopted at the O-RAN system Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC to empower the RAN use cases, such as traffic steering, massive MIMO optimization, radio resource allocation for UAV applications, etc.

In the meanwhile, AI/ML also brings in security attacks such as data poisoning, backdoor, evasion, model stealing and data extraction. Therefore, security testing of ML is necessary to defend such threats from AI/ML used by xApp and rApp in O-RAN system.

	ML Data Poisoning

void

	Security test of Open Fronthaul

	Overview

This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism of the O-RAN open fronthaul interface.

	Open Fronthaul Point-to-Point LAN Segment

IEEE 802.1X-2020 Port-based Network Access Control [11] provides the means to control network access in point-to-point LAN segments within the Open Fronthaul network. Port-based network access control in the O-RAN Alliance Open Fronthaul comprises supplicant, authenticator, and authentication server entities described in IEEE 802.1X-2020 [11].

The security test cases in this clause cover the validation of the authenticator and supplicant functionalities of the 802.1X support by O-RAN components of O-DU and O-RU.

	STC-11-11.2-001: Authenticator Validation

Requirement Name: Authenticator function of O-RAN component

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.5.5.2, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: Requirements of Authenticators in the open fronthaul network and its interface to an Authentication Server

Threat References: T-FRHAUL-02

O-RAN Component References: O-DU, O-RU

	Test description and applicability

Open fronthaul network component (such as O-RU and O-DU) could serve the authenticator role of the 802.1X for port-based network access control. This test validates the authenticator requirements of the network component to serve the request from supplicant(s) using EAP TLS authentication per 802.1X-2020 [11].

	Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the O-RAN component with IP enabled network interface reachable to the authentication server and 802.1X enabled for its open fronthaul interface.

First, set up an authentication RADIUS server (e.g. free radius on Linux) with root, server and client certificates configured with .cnf files and eap configuration (eap.conf). Then start the authentication RADIUS server.

	Test procedure

First set up the 802.1X test tool host/device with EAP authentication for 802.1X protocol.

Run the 802.1X test tool emulating the request(s) from the supplicant(s) towards the DUT, which is the authenticator. Ensure the 802.1X authentication process runs to completion.

The following test scenarios shall be validated:

Test tool (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAPoL, correct Identity (Certificate DN) and Client Certificate (provisioned on the Radius server)

Test tool (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAPoL, correct Identity (Certificate DN) and incorrect Client Certificate (not provisioned on the Radius server)

Test tool (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAPoL and incorrect Identity (Certificate DN)

Test tool (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAP non-TLS (e.g. MD5) authentication

	Test requirements (expected results)

The O-RAN component shall be able to grant or deny the emulated supplicant’s 802.1X port-based network access request as the authenticator with successful or failed EAP authentication per test scenarios listed above:

Successful RADIUS authentication by the authentication server;

Failed RADIUS authentication (wrong certificate) by the authentication server;

Failed RADIUS authentication (wrong Identity) by the authentication server;

Failed RADIUS authentication (wrong authentication type) by the authentication server;

	STC-11-11.2-002: Supplicant Validation

Requirement Name: Supplicant function of O-RAN component

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.5.5.2, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: Requirements of Supplicant in the open fronthaul network

Threat References: T-FRHAUL-02

O-RAN Component References: O-DU, O-RU

	Test description and applicability

Open fronthaul network component (such as O-RU and O-DU) shall support supplicant role of the 802.1X for port-based network access control. This test validates the supplicant requirement of the network component for port connection request using EAP TLS authentication per 802.1X-2020 [11].

	Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the O-RAN component with 802.1X enabled on its open fronthaul interface.

First set up an authentication RADIUS2 server (e.g. free radius on Linux) with root, server and client certificates configured with .cnf files and eap configuration (eap.conf). Then start the authentication RADIUS server.

	Test procedure

First set up the 802.1X test tool host/device as the authenticator with EAP TLS authentication for 802.1X protocol and configure the preset RADIUS server as its authentication server. Then start the test run as an emulated authenticator waiting for the supplicant request.

Configure and enable the O-RAN component of the open fronthaul interface to start the port connection request as a supplicant towards the 802.1X test tool, which is the authenticator. Verify the 802.1X authentication process runs to completion.

The following test scenarios shall be covered for validation:

O-RAN component (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAPoL, correct Identity (Certificate DN) and Client Certificate (provisioned on the Radius server)

O-RAN component (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAPoL, correct Identity (Certificate DN) and incorrect Client Certificate (un-provisioned on the Radius server)

O-RAN component (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAPoL and incorrect Identity (Certificate DN)

O-RAN component (as supplicant) setting for 802.1X with EAP non-TLS (e.g. MD5) authentication (optional)

	Test requirements (expected results)

The O-RAN component shall be granted or denied the 802.1X port-based network access request as the supplicant with successful or failed EAP authentication per test scenarios listed above:

Successful RADIUS authentication by the authentication server;

Failed RADIUS authentication (wrong certificate) by the authentication server;

Failed RADIUS authentication (wrong Identity) by the authentication server;

Failed RADIUS authentication (wrong authentication type) by the authentication server;

	Security test of O-RU

	Overview

This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to O-RU.

void

	Security test of Near-RT RIC

	Overview

This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to Near-RT RIC.

	Testing of IPSec on E2 interface

	Test Description

If IPSec shall be used to secure communication between the Near-RT RIC and E2 nodes, validate implementation according to clause 6.5.

	Security test of xApps

	Overview

 This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to xApps deployed on Near-RT RIC.

	xApp Signing and Verification

 Security test cases “STC-9-9.5-001: Software Image Signing” and “STC-9-9.5-002: Software Signature Verification” shall be performed.

	Security test of Non-RT RIC

	Overview

 This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to Non-RT RIC and the R1 and A1 interfaces.  Security test cases for rApps are covered in a separate sub-section.

	Non-RT RIC

 Following zero trust principles, O-RAN Non-RT RIC shall enforce authorization using OAuth 2.0

STC-15-15.2-001: Non-RT RIC OAuth 2.0 Resource Owner/Server

Requirement Name:  SEC-CTL- NonRTRIC-1

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.1.2.2, Security Controls, Non-RT RIC and rApps, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: OAuth 2.0 security controls for Non-RT RIC authorization of service requests

Threat References: T-NONRTRIC-01, T-NONRTRIC-02, T-NONRTRIC-03

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC

Test description and applicability

The Non-RT RIC shall support OAuth 2.0 resource owner/server for A1-EI.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC with OAuth 2.0 support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for OAuth2.0 specified in OAuth Test Procedure, clause 6.6.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The Non-RT RIC shall be able to authorize/deny access to resources using OAuth 2.0.

STC-15-15.2-002: Non-RT RIC OAuth 2.0 Client

Requirement Name: SEC-CTL- NonRTRIC-2

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.1.2.2, Security Controls, Non-RT RIC and rApps, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: OAuth 2.0 security controls for Non-RT RIC authorization of service requests

Threat References: T-NONRTRIC-01, T-NONRTRIC-02, T-NONRTRIC-03

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC

Test description and applicability

The Non-RT RIC shall support OAuth 2.0 client for A1-P.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC with OAuth 2.0 support enabled

Test procedure

This test case follows the test procedure for OAuth2.0 specified in OAuth Test Procedure, clause 6.6.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The Non-RT RIC shall be able to request and be permitted access to resources using OAuth 2.0.

STC-15-15.2-003: Non-RT RIC Framework OAuth 2.0

Requirement Name: SEC-CTL- NonRTRIC-3

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.1.2.2, Security Controls, Non-RT RIC and rApps, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: OAuth 2.0 security controls for Non-RT RIC authorization of service requests

Threat References: T-NONRTRIC-01, T-NONRTRIC-02, T-NONRTRIC-03

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC Framework

Test description and applicability

The Non-RT RIC Framework shall support OAuth 2.0 resource owner/server.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC Framework with OAuth 2.0 support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for OAuth2.0 specified in OAuth Test Procedure, clause 6.6.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The Non-RT RIC Framework shall be able to authorize access to resources using OAuth 2.0.

R1 interface

The R1 interface is internal to the Non-RT RIC to provide communication between the Non-RT RIC Framework and rApps.  Following zero trust principles, the R1 interface shall provide confidentiality and integrity protection of data in transit and shall support mutual authentication and authorization for access to services and resources.

STC-15-15.3-001: TLS on R1 Interface

Requirement Name:  SEC-CTL-R1-1

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.6, Security Controls, R1 Interface, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: TLS on R1 interface

Threat References: T-R1-06, T-R1-07

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, rApps, R1 interface

Test description and applicability

The Non-RT RIC Framework shall support TLS on the R1 interface.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC Framework with TLS support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for TLS specified in TLS Test Procedure, clause 6.3.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The R1 interface shall provide confidentiality and integrity protection for data in transit.

STC-15-15.3-002: mTLS on R1 Interface

Requirement Name:  SEC-CTL-R1-2

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.6, Security Controls, R1 Interface, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: mTLS on R1 interface

Threat References: T-R1-03

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, rApps, R1 interface

Test description and applicability

The Non-RT RIC Framework shall support mutual authentication using mTLS, with PKI and X.509 certificates, on the R1 interface.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC Framework with mTLS support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case follows the test procedure for TLS specified in TLS Test Procedure, clause 6.3.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The R1 interface shall support mutual authentication using mTLS on the R1 interface.

STC-15-15.3-003: OAuth 2.0 on R1 Interface

Requirement Name: SEC-CTL-R1-3

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.6, Security Controls, R1 interface, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: R1 interface supports OAuth 2.0 security controls

Threat References: T-R1-01, T-R1-04, T-R1-05

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, rApps, R1 interface

Test description and applicability

The R1 interface shall support OAuth 2.0.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC Framework with OAuth 2.0 support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for OAuth2.0 specified in OAuth Test Procedure, clause 6.6.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The R1 interface shall support use of OAuth 2.0.

A1 interface

The A1 interface provides communication between the Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC.  Following zero trust principles, the A1 interface provides confidentiality and integrity protection of data in transit and supports mutual authentication and authorization for access to services and resources.

STC-15-15.4-001: TLS on A1 Interface

Requirement Name:  SEC-CTL-A1-1

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.1, Security Controls, A1 Interface, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: TLS on A1 interface

Threat References: T-A1-02, T-A1-03

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, A1 interface

Test description and applicability

The Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC shall support TLS on the A1 interface.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC with TLS support enabled on the A1 interface.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for TLS specified in TLS Test Procedure, clause 6.3.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The A1 interface shall provide confidentiality and integrity protection for data in transit.

STC-15-15.4-002: mTLS on A1 Interface

Requirement Name:  SEC-CTL-A1-2

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.1, Security Controls, A1 Interface, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: mTLS on A1 interface

Threat References: T-A1-01

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, A1 interface

Test description and applicability

The Non-RT RIC shall support mutual authentication using mTLS, with PKI and X.509 certificates, on the A1 interface.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC Framework with mTLS support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for TLS specified in TLS Test Procedure, clause 6.3.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The A1 interface shall support mutual authentication using mTLS.

STC-15-15.4-003: OAuth 2.0 on A1 interface

Requirement Name: SEC-CTL-A1-3

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.1, Security Controls, A1 interface, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: A1 interface supports OAuth 2.0 security controls

Threat References: T-A1-01

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, and A1 interface

Test description and applicability

The A1 interface shall support OAuth 2.0.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC with OAuth 2.0 support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for OAuth2.0 specified in OAuth Test Procedure, clause 6.6.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The A1 interface shall support use of OAuth 2.0.

	Security test of rApps

	Overview

This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to rApps deployed on Non-RT RIC.

	rApp Signing and Verification

Security test cases “STC-9-9.5-001: Software Image Signing” and “STC-9-9.5-002: Software Signature Verification” shall be performed.

	rApp Authorization

STC-16-16.3-001: rApp OAuth 2.0 Client

Requirement Name: SEC-CTL- NonRTRIC-4

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.1.2.2, Security Controls, Non-RT RIC and rApps, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications, v4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: OAuth 2.0 security controls for rApps authorization of service requests

Threat References: T-rAPP-04

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, rApps

Test description and applicability

The rApp shall support OAuth 2.0 client.

Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the rApp with OAuth 2.0 support enabled.

Test procedure

This test case shall follow the test procedure for OAuth2.0 specified in OAuth Test Procedure, clause 6.6.3.

Test requirements (expected results)

The rApp shall be able to request access and be permitted access to resources using OAuth 2.0.

	Security test of SMO

	Overview

This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to SMO.

	O1 Interface Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM) Validation

Following zero trust principles, O-RAN O1 interface shall enforce confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity through an encrypted transport, and shall support least privilege access control using the network configuration access control model. The network configuration access control model (NACM) [14] provides the means to restrict access for users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF protocol operations and content.

The security test case in this section validates the NACM enforcement on the O-RAN component O1 interface for the role-based access control.

	STC-17-17.2-001: O1 Interface NACM Validation

Requirement Name: O1 Interface security requirements

Requirement Reference: Clause 5.2.2.1, O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications 4.0 [5]

Requirement Description: Requirements of O1 Interface Confidentiality, Integrity & Authenticity protection and Least Privilege Access Control

Threat References: T-O-RAN-02, T-O-RAN-06

O-RAN Component References: Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU

	Test description and applicability

O-RAN component(s) managed by SMO through O1 interface shall support secured NETCONF sessions over TLS and role-based least privilege access control enforced by NACM [14]. This test validates the O1 interface security requirements of the O-RAN component(s) with the focus on role-based NACM rule(s) set enforcement.

	Test setup and configuration

DUT shall be the O-RAN component with:

IP enabled O1 interface, reachable to the authentication server;

Valid certificate loaded for the server and necessary certificate authorities (CAs)

Client’s root CA required to validate NETCONF client certificate

Valid TLS Client-to-NETCONF username mapping

	Test procedure

First set up a host/device with TLS client software installed, valid client certificates, keys, root CA certificate for the server (O-RAN component), and all intermediate CA certificates required to validate the client certificate.

The following test steps shall be validated:

Start the NETCONF-over-TLS session using OpenSSL s_client command to connect with DUT O1 interface using TLSv1.2 or TLSv1.3 if available with a user account from the O1_nacm_management group

Verify the session is established and mapped to the correct NETCONF user

Verify the global NACM enforcement control setting of

enable-nacm = true

read-default = permit

write-default = deny

exec-default = deny

enable-external-groups = true

Verify the NACM rule sets for the following pre-defined groups

O1_nacm_management

O1_user_management

O1_network_management

O1_network_monitoring

O1_software_management

Close the NETCONF session and TLS connection

Upon availability of the NETCONF operations set(s) definition per NACM group, the NACM rule set(s) enforcement by the DUT shall be validated for each of those pre-defined groups listed above.

	Test requirements (expected results)

The O-RAN component shall support the NETCONF over TLS session over its O1 interface and NACM enforcement control settings.

	Security test of O-Cloud

	Overview

This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to O-Cloud hosting the O-RAN components/system.

void

	Security test of VNF/CNF/PNF

	Overview

This chapter contains security tests to validate the security protection mechanism specific to CNF/VNF deployed on the O-Cloud and PNF deployed as a standalone hardware/appliance.

void

Annex A (informative): 	Example of Security Testing Tools / Toolset

Testing Tool

Example(s)

DTLS scanning tool

open source “pySSLScan”: https://github.com/DinoTools/pysslscan

IPSec IKE scanning tool

open source “ike-scan”: https://github.com/royhills/ike-scan

SSH audit tool

open source “ssh-audit”: https://github.com/jtesta/ssh-audit

TLS scanning tool

open source “sslyze”: https://github.com/nabla-c0d3/sslyze

Software image signing tool

open source “Sigstore”: https://github.com/sigstore

Table Annex A1 List of sample open source security testing tools/toolset

Annex B (informative): 	Template of test report

A. GENERAL INFORMATION

A1 Name of test campaign

A2 Version of the report – reference ID

A3 Date(s) of testing

A4 Contact person (tester) – incl. Name, Organization, E-mail address

A4 Test location (lab) – incl. the address

A5 Description of test campaign, summary of test results, conclusions

List of tests - details of each test can be found in Section E.

Test No.

Test name

Test status [ PASS / FAIL / - ]

01

02

03

B. TEST AND MEASUREMENT EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS

#

Equipment or tool

Type

Manufacture

Version (HW/SW)

Notes*

01

02

03

* Specific details such as the sub-module version (such as vulnerability database version)

C. SYSTEM UNDER TEST

C1 Total number of DUTs included in SUT

C2 Deployment architecture

C3 Description of SUT – connection/block diagram

DUT 1*

C3 Type

C4 Serial Number

C5 Supplier (manufacture)

C6 SW version

C7 HW version (if applicable)

C8 Interface/IOT profile(s) if applied

C9 Description incl. parameters, setting/configuration

* If SUT contains more DUTs, please copy the table.

D. TEST CONFIGURATION

D1 Function(s) and Service(s) setting

D2 Network setting

E. TEST RESULTS

E1 Test No.

E2 Test name

E3 Date(s) of test execution

E4 Reference to test specification

E5 Utilized test and measurement equipment and tools, incl. the specific setting/configuration – reference to Section B

E6 Test setup – connection/block diagram – deployment scenario

E7 Test procedure – describe differences in comparison with the test procedure defined in test spec. – limitations

E8 Test results –including outputs of the test properties and the attachment of log file(s) and/or screenshots

E9 Notes, including observed issues with the solutions

E10 Conclusions – pass/fail – assessment of test results in comparison with the expected results – gap analysis

Revision history

Date

Revision

Description

2021.11.10

01.00

Final initial version 01.00

2022.03.23

02.00.07

Updated sections:

7.4 Network Protocol Fuzzing

9.4 Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)

11.2 Open Fronthaul Point-to-Point LAN Segment

17.2 O1 Interface Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM) Validation

2022.07.19

03.00.01

Applied the latest O-RAN technical specifications template

Updated sections:

2.1 Normative references

3.2 Abbreviations

6.3 TLS

6.6 OAuth 2.0

9.5 Software Image Signing and Verification

13.2 Testing of IPSec on E2

14.2 Testing of TLS on A1

2022.07.25

03.00.02

Updated cross-reference section numbers of the test cases to align with latest WG11 specs

Updated table of contents

2023.03.09

04.00.00

Updated clauses:

14 Security Test of xApps

15 Security test of Non-RT RIC

16 Security test of rApps

Added content to:

14.2 xApp Signing and Verification

16.2 rApp Signing and Verification

Change wording in many places to align document with ETSI PAS

History

Date

Revision

Description

2023.03.XX

04.00.00

Published as Final version 04.00

2022.07.19

03.00.01

Published as Final version 03.00

2022.03.23

02.00.07

Published as Final version 02.00

2021.11.10

01.00

Published as Final version 01.00

	________________________________________________________________________________________________© 2023 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V. Your use is subject to the copyright statement on the cover page of this specification.	52