O-RAN-WG2.A1GAP-v02.00
Technical Specification
This is a re-published version of the attached final specification.
For this re-published version, the prior versions of the IPR Policy will apply, except that the previous requirement for Adopters (as defined in the earlier IPR Policy) to agree to an O-RAN Adopter License Agreement to access and use Final Specifications shall no longer apply or be required for these Final Specifications after 1st July 2022.
The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this specification in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material on this site for your personal use, or copy the material on this site for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.
O-RAN-WG2.A1GAP-v02.00
Technical Specification
O-RAN Working Group 2
A1 interface: General Aspects and Principles
Prepared by the O-RAN Alliance e.V. Copyright © 2020 by the O-RAN Alliance e.V. By using, accessing or downloading any part of this O-RAN specification document, including by copying, saving, distributing, displaying or preparing derivatives of, you agree to be and are bound to the terms of the O-RAN Adopter License Agreement contained in the Annex of this specification. All other rights reserved.
1
Revision History
Contents
Revision History	2
Chapter 1 Introduction	4
1.1 Scope	4
1.2 References	4
1.3 Definitions and Abbreviations	5
1.3.1 Definitions	5
1.3.2 Abbreviations	7
Chapter 2 General Aspects	7
2.1 A1 Architecture	7
2.1.1 General	7
2.1.2 Role of A1 in the O-RAN Architecture	8
2.1.3 A1 service architecture	8
2.2 A1 interface general principles	10
2.3 A1 interface specification objectives	10
2.4 A1 interface capabilities	11
Chapter 3 Functions of the A1 interface	11
3.1 Policy management	11
3.1.1 Introduction	11
3.1.2 The policy management function	11
3.1.3 Life cycle aspects of A1 policies	12
3.1.4 Identification and scope of A1 policies	12
3.1.5 A1 policy content	14
3.2 A1 Enrichment Information	15
3.2.1 Introduction	15
3.2.2 The enrichment information function	16
3.2.3 Life cycle aspects of A1 Enrichment Information	16
3.2.4 Identification of A1 Enrichment Information	17
3.2.5 A1 Enrichment Information format and delivery	17
Chapter 4 Signalling procedures of the A1 interface	17
4.1 Policy related procedures	17
4.2 ML Model related procedures	17
4.3 Enrichment information transfer procedures	17
Chapter 5 A1 interface protocol structure	18
Chapter 6 Other A1 interface specifications	18
6.1 A1 interface: Transport	18
6.2 A1 interface: Application Protocol	19
Annex	20
Introduction
1.1 Scope
This Technical Specification has been produced by O-RAN Alliance.
The contents of the present document are subject to continuing work within O-RAN WG2 and may change following formal O-RAN approval. In the event that O-RAN Alliance decides to modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN Alliance with an identifying change of release date and an increase in version number as follows:
Release x.y.z
where:
x	the first digit is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have x=01).
y	the second digit is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document.
z	the third digit included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process.
The present document is part of a TS-family covering the O-RAN WG2: A1 interface as identified below: “General Aspects and Principles”. “Transport Protocol”. “Application Protocol”.
1.2 References
The following documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of the present document.
-	References are either specific (identified by date of publication, edition number, version number, etc.) or non-specific.
-	For a specific reference, subsequent revisions do not apply.
-	For a non-specific reference, the latest version applies. In the case of a reference to a 3GPP document (including a GSM document), a non-specific reference implicitly refers to the latest version of that document in Release 15.
[1]	3GPP TR 21.905: “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications”
[2]					O-RAN WG2: “Non-RT RIC and A1 interface (Use Case Requirements)”
[3]					O-RAN WG2: “Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC AI/ML (Overall description and Requirements)”
[4]	ETSI GR ENI 004 v1.1.1 (2018-06): “Experiential Networked Intelligence (ENI); Terminology for Main Concepts in ENI”
[5] 	O-RAN: “towards an Open and smart RAN“, O-RAN white paper, https://www.o-ran.org/s/O-RAN-WP-FInal-181017.pdf
[6]	3GPP TS 38.463: “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network;  NG-RAN; E1 application protocol (E1AP)”
[7]	3GPP TS 38.473: “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network;  NG-RAN; F1 application protocol (F1AP)”
[8]	3GPP TS 38.300 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network NR; NR and NG-RAN Overall Description; Stage 2“
[9]	3GPP TS 23.501: “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; System Architecture for the 5G System; Stage 2”
[10]	3GPP TS 23.003: “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; Numbering, addressing and identification”
[11]	3GPP TS 38.413: “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NG-RAN; NG Application Protocol (NGAP)”
[12]	O-RAN WG2: “A1 interface: Application Protocol”
[13]	ITU-T P.1203.3: “SERIES P: TELEPHONE TRANSMISSION QUALITY, TELEPHONE INSTALLATIONS, LOCAL LINE NETWORKS; Models and tools for quality assessment of streamed media; Parametric bitstream-based quality assessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming services over reliable transport – Quality integration module”
[14]	ETSI EG 202 009-2: “User Group; Quality of telecom services; Part 2: User related parameters on a service specific basis”
[15]	3GPP TS 28.554: “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; Management and orchestration; 5G end to end Key Performance Indicators (KPI)”
[16]	O-RAN WG2: “A1 interface: Transport Protocol”
1.3 Definitions and Abbreviations
1.3.1 Definitions
For the purposes of the present document, the terms and definitions given in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1], O-RAN [2,3] and the following apply. A term defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same term, if any, in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1].
Terminology related to policies are based on ETSI GR ENI 004 V1.1.1 (2018-06) [4] with O-RAN specific amendments added as notes:
policy: set of rules that are used to manage and control the changing and/or maintaining of the state of one or more managed objects
imperative policy: type of policy that uses statements to explicitly change the state of a set of targeted objects
NOTE 1: The order of statements that make up the policy is explicitly defined.
NOTE 2: In the present document, Imperative Policy will refer to policies that are made up of Events, Conditions, and Actions.
NOTE 3: Imperative policies that are made up of Events, Conditions, and Actions are not applicable to the A1 interface in O-RAN.
declarative policy: type of policy that uses statements to express the goals of the policy, but not how to accomplish those goals
NOTE 1: State is not explicitly manipulated, and the order of statements that make up the policy is irrelevant.
NOTE 2: Declarative policies are further categorized as:
policy objectives – statements with the objective to reach the goal of the policy
policy resources – statements expressing the use of resources
NOTE 3: Declarative policies are applicable to the A1 interface in O-RAN.
intent policy: a higher-level declarative policy, typically expressed in a simplified form (for example using natural language).
NOTE 1: Each statement in an Intent Policy may require the translation of one or more of its terms to a form that another managed functional entity can understand.
NOTE 2: Intent policies are not applicable to A1 interface.
RAN intent: Expression of high-level operational or business goals to be achieved by the radio access network, allowing an operator to specify the desired SLAs that RAN needs to fulfill for all or a class of users in a given area over a period of time.
NOTE: RAN intent is not in A1 scope
A1 policy: Type of declarative policies expressed using formal statements that enable the non-RT RIC function in the SMO to guide the near-RT RIC function, and hence the RAN, towards better fulfilment of the RAN intent.
Enrichment information: Information provided to an entity, in addition to the information that is generally available to it, in order to enhance the performance of its tasks.
NOTE: the availability or usage of enrichment information is not critical for the entity to be able to perform its tasks.
A1 Enrichment Information: Enrichment information that is collected or derived at SMO/non-RT RIC either from non-network data sources or from network functions themselves and provided over the A1 interface to be utilized by near-RT RIC.
NOTE 1: A1 Enrichment Information is either not directly available to near-RT RIC from O-RAN network functions via standardized interfaces or cannot be derived in near-RT RIC from network function data due to processing or storage constraints.
NOTE 2: Inferred/modelled information elements that can be provided over O1-CM is not considered as A1 Enrichment Information.
External Enrichment Information: Information provided by an O-RAN external information source through a direct and secure connection with near-RT RIC.
NOTE: Detailed specification of a direct interface for External Enrichment Information is out of scope of this specification.
1.3.2 Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1], O-RAN [2,3] and the following apply. An abbreviation defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same abbreviation, if any, in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1].
AI				Artificial Intelligence
BSS			Business Support System
JSON			JavaScript Object Notation
KPI			Key Performance Indicator
KQI			Key Quality Indicator
ML			Machine Learning
OAM			Operation and Maintenance
O&A			Operation & Administration
PM			Performance Monitoring
QoS			Quality of Service
QoE			Quality of Experience
RAN			Radio Access Network
RT				Real Time
RIC			RAN Intelligent Controller
RRM			Radio Resource Management
SLA			Service Level Agreement
S-NSSAI		Single Network Slice Selection Assistance Information
SMO			Service Management and Orchestration
SPID			Subscriber Profile IDentity
S-NSSAI		Single Network Slice Selection Assistance Information
UE				User Equipment
UEId			UE Identity
General Aspects
2.1 A1 Architecture
2.1.1 General
The O-RAN architecture includes a non-Real Time (RT) RAN Intelligent Controller (RIC) and a near-RT RIC which are connected through the A1 interface.
Figure 2-1: A1 is the interface between the non-RT RIC and the near-RT RIC.
2.1.2 Role of A1 in the O-RAN Architecture
The non-RT RIC function resides in the Service Management and Orchestration (SMO) layer of the O-RAN OAM architecture [5] that also handles deployment and configuration as well as data collection of e.g. RAN observables.
In the SMO layer there also resides functions that handle AI/ML workflow, e.g. training and update of ML Models, as well as functions for deployment of ML models and other applications [3].
The SMO Layer may also have access to data other than that available in the RAN network functions and this enrichment information can be used to enhance the RAN guidance and optimization functions.
One purpose of the SMO layer is to optimize the RAN performance towards fulfilment of the SLAs in the RAN intent. The purpose of the A1 interface is to enable the non-RT RIC function to provide policy-based guidance, ML model management and enrichment information to the near-RT RIC function so that the RAN can optimize e.g. RRM under certain conditions.
Figure 2-2: Illustration of A1 and related interfaces in the O-RAN architecture. E2 nodes here refers to RAN nodes such as an O-CU-CP, an O-CU-UP, an O-DU or an O-eNB. A1 policies and A1 Enrichment Information, derived from various (O-RAN internal and O-RAN external) sources, are provided by the non-RT RIC to the near-RT RIC via the A1 interface.
2.1.3 A1 service architecture
2.1.3.1	A1 Policy Management Service
Based on high level directives (goals for the system) expressed in RAN Intent, and on observables (events and counters) provided over O1, the non-RT RIC defines policies that are provided to the near-RT RIC over the A1 interface. The purpose of the A1 policies is to guide the RAN performance towards the overall goal expressed in RAN Intent. The A1 policies are declarative policies that contain statements on policy objectives and policy resources applicable to UEs and cells.
The non-RT RIC manages the A1 policies based on A1 policy feedback, and on the network status provided over O1. The non-RT RIC uses the O1 observables to continuously evaluate the impact of the A1 policies towards fulfillment of the RAN Intent and will based on internal conditions decide to issue/update the directives expressed in the A1 policies.
The near-RT RIC functions based on its internal functions or applications, the configuration received over O1 and the temporary policies received over A1. The A1 policies do not survive a re-start of the near-RT RIC.
To support the policy enforcement in the near-RT RIC, the non-RT RIC can provide enrichment information over the A1 interface.
A1 ML Model Management Service
ML models can be trained and executed in different places in the O-RAN architecture. Two scenarios described in [3] that involves the non-RT RIC are:
Scenario 1.1: ML model is trained in the SMO layer and then used by the non-RT RIC to improve the monitoring and guidance of the RAN based on the O1 observability. The training and the deployment of the ML Model is handled by SMO internal functions. The training data is the same as the data the non-RT RIC will use for inference, i.e. the O1 observability.
Scenario 1.2: ML model is trained in the SMO layer and then used by the near-RT RIC to improve the optimization of the RAN. The training of the ML Model is handled by SMO internal functions. The input data for training is the same as the input data the near-RT RIC will use for inference. The trained ML Model is deployed by the SMO layer via the O1 interface. The performance evaluation resulting from the execution of the ML model, and the handling of explicit feedback from the ML model itself, is based on O1 observability.
To support the ML model inference in the near-RT RIC, the non-RT RIC can provide enrichment information over the A1 interface.
A1 Enrichment Information Service
Enrichment information is generically defined as information provided to an entity, in addition to the information that is generally available to it, in order to enhance the performance of its tasks. It can be produced based on information from one or more sources, e.g. by relaying, combining, refining or analyzing information from the input source(s).
In the O-RAN architecture there are ‘O-RAN internal information sources’ and ‘O-RAN external information sources’. The network functions in the RAN are examples of O-RAN internal information sources.
SMO collects information from O-RAN internal and O-RAN external information sources. Based on this information, non-RT RIC can derive information that could be beneficial for both non-RT RIC and near-RT RIC internal functions or applications, e.g. an ML model, to improve its performance.
In relation to the A1 interface, two types of enrichment information are distinguished:
A1 Enrichment Information that is provided by the non-RT RIC to the near-RT RIC through an A1 interface connection;
External Enrichment Information that is provided by an O-RAN external information source through a direct and secure connection with near-RT RIC.
The A1 interface is used for discovery, request and delivery of A1 Enrichment Information.
The A1 interface is also used for the discovery of External Enrichment Information and the non-RT RIC is responsible for the authentication of the source and the security of the direct connection.
2.2 A1 interface general principles
The general principles for the specification of the A1 interface are as follows:
-	the A1 interface is an open logical interface within O-RAN architecture between the non-RT RIC functionality in the Orchestration & Automation layer and the near-RT RIC functionality in the RAN;
- 	the A1 interface enables a multi-vendor environment and is independent of specific implementations of the Orchestration & Automation layer, non-RT RIC, and near-RT RIC;
- 	the A1 interface enables policy-based guidance (objective, resource) of radio resource management internal functions or applications that are part of near-RT RIC;
- 	the A1 interface can provide basic feedback mechanism from near-RT RIC that enables non-RT RIC to monitor the use of policies;
- 	the policy enforcement service in near-RT RIC requires that the policies transferred over A1 interface are expressed using a standardized mechanism (language, syntax, …);
- 	the A1 interface enables transmission of enrichment information from non-RT RIC to near-RT RIC as needed by near-RT RIC;
- 	the A1 interface enables near-RT to discover available enrichment information for which secure delivery can be provided, and to request delivery of enrichment information;
- 	the A1 interface is defined in an extensible way that enables new information for new functions to be added without needing to change the protocol or the procedures;
- 	A1 policies are created, modified and deleted by the non-RT RIC;
- 	the A1 policies are enforced until deleted. It is the responsibility of non-RT RIC to create and delete policies based on context information e.g., observability from RAN indicating RAN intent fulfillment received over O1. It is the responsibility of near-RT RIC to stop enforcing policies.
2.3 A1 interface specification objectives
The A1 interface specification facilitates the following:
-	inter-connection of non-RT RIC functionality in the Orchestration & Automation domain with near-RT RIC functionality in the Radio Access Network supplied by different manufacturers;
- 	provide policies for individual UEs or groups of UEs;
-	provide basic feedback on policy state from near-RT RIC that enables non-RT RIC to monitor the use of policies;
- 	provide enrichment information as required by near-RT RIC.
2.4 A1 interface capabilities
The A1 interface supports [2,3]:
-	Transfer of policy management information from non-RT RIC to near-RT RIC;
-	Policy feedback from near-RT RIC to non-RT RIC;
-	Discovery and request of A1 Enrichment Information from near-RT RIC to non-RT RIC and delivery of A1 Enrichment Information from non-RT RIC to near-RT RIC.
Functions of the A1 interface
3.1 Policy management
3.1.1 Introduction
The purpose of A1 policies is to enable the non-RT RIC function in the O&A layer to guide the near-RT RIC function, and hence the RAN, towards a better fulfilment of the RAN intent.
NOTE:	RAN Intent represents e.g. the SLA from the BSS (Business Support System) that the RAN is to fulfil for all users or for a subset of users (e.g. QCI or slice). Based on the permanent configuration and the available resources, the RAN strives to deliver the expected QoS for the users.
By utilizing the observability over O1, and the A1 policy feedback, the non-RT RIC can conclude that the RAN Intent is not achieved. The non-RT RIC can then decide to use A1 policies that enable the near-RT RIC to e.g. optimize RRM for a single UEs or for group of UEs.
E.g.:	When the non-RT RIC understands that the available resources in a certain area are not enough to fulfil the SLA for all users in a slice, it can then decide to temporarily change the QoS targets for some users (dynamic group of users) belonging to the same slice (pre-defined group of users).
There are different types of A1 policies referred to as policy types. A non-RT RIC need not use all policy types, and a specific function in the near-RT RIC may only support one specific policy type. Non-RT RIC can discover available policy types over A1.
Note: as policy types represents capabilities of the near-RT RIC they may also be indicated to the non-RT RIC in other ways.
3.1.2 The policy management function
The policy management function is used by the non-RT RIC to provision and manage A1 policies that are enforced by the near-RT RIC. The non-RT RIC is responsible for definition and administration of A1 policies.
The function is used to create, update and delete A1 policies in the near-RT RIC.
The function is used to query the presence, content and run-time status of an A1 policy in the near-RT RIC.
The function is supported by A1 policy feedback from the near-RT RIC to the non-RT RIC.
NOTE 1:	As the near-RT RIC cannot change the content of a policy, only a change in enforcement status can be notified. I.e. if context is changed in such a way that a policy cannot be enforced by the near-RT RIC, the non-RT RIC is notified and may decide to delete the policy.
NOTE 2:	Feedback on the fulfilment of A1 policies in the near-RT RIC is not transferred over the A1 interface. The non-RT RIC can estimate the fulfilment of A1 policies based on O1 observables.
NOTE 3:	Before and after the creation of an A1 policy, the non-RT RIC will monitor the network to understand the effect of the A1 policy on performance. Performance monitoring or tracing is not handled over the A1 interface.
3.1.3 Life cycle aspects of A1 policies
Per default, the near-RT RIC controls the RAN based on the persistent configuration. The RAN operation can be optimized using A1 policies that, compared to the persistent configuration,
is not critical to traffic;
have temporary validity;
handle individual UE or dynamically defined groups of UEs;
acts within and takes precedence over the configuration;
is non-persistent, i.e. does not survive a restart of the near-RT RIC.
An A1 policy exists in the near-RT RIC after it has been created by the non-RT RIC using the A1 Create policy procedure and accepted by the near-RT RIC.
For an A1 policy, the near-RT RIC can provide basic policy feedback to the non-RT RIC using notifications containing information on enforcement status and causes.
The near-RT RIC continuously evaluates the policy conditions versus the environment and notifies the non-RT RIC in case the policy cannot be enforced or in case the environment changes so that the policy can be enforced.
NOTE:	When a created A1 policy is accepted, it is assumed to be enforced until near-RT RIC notifies that it cannot be enforced.
An A1 policy can be updated by the non-RT RIC using the A1 Update policy procedure. After the update, the policy is evaluated and enforced by the near-RT RIC based on the updated policy statements.
An A1 policy exists in the near-RT RIC until it is deleted by the non-RT RIC using the A1 Delete policy procedure.
3.1.4 Identification and scope of A1 policies
An A1 policy type is identified by the policy type identifier (PolicyTypeId). Different policy types have different PolicyTypeIds. Based on the PolicyTypeId, schemas are identified and used for creation, validation and formulation, and for query of the status, of A1 policies of that type.
An A1 policy is identified by a policy identifier (PolicyId) that is assigned by non-RT RIC. The PolicyId is locally unique within non-RT RIC and sent in the policy request operations that carry representations of A1 policies.
A1 policies consist of a scope identifier and one or more policy statements. The scope identifier represents what the policy statements are to be applied on (e.g. UEs, QoS flows, or cells). The policy statements represent the directives to the near-RT RIC and covers policy objectives and policy resources.
Figure 3-1: Illustration of the structure of an A1 policy
By including policy statements with policy objectives, the quality of experience can be optimized for UEs or QoS flows that are identified either explicitly by a UE identifier or implicitly by a group identifier from which the near-RT RIC can deduce a set of UE identifiers and QoS flow identifiers. The group identifier defines associated UEs using SPID or S-NSSAI, or associated QoS Flows using S-NSSAI or 5QI.
By including policy statements with policy resources, UEs can e.g. be made to avoid certain cells or the radio network can be optimized in specific areas e.g. regarding energy efficiency.
The remaining part of this sub-section describes the identifiers that can be used as scope identifier in A1 policies. The scope identifier can be composed by a single or a by a combination of these as is further detailed in the A1 Application Protocol specification [12].
Identification of UEs
In the scope of A1 policies, a UE is identified by a UE identifier (UEId). The UEId identifies a logical UE entity that is known to the RAN and measurements related to it. It does not identify any hardware equipment or user subscription.
UEId is used for correlating O1-PM data with service targets and enables evaluation of the fulfillment of policies. In order to be able to utilize non-RAN data for the usage of A1 policies, non-RAN data need to include identifiers that can be correlated with UEIds by the non-RT RIC.
The UEId is based on the RAN UE Id defined in the 3GPP specifications for the E1 interface [6] and the F1 interface [7].
If the non-RT RIC needs to express policies for a dynamically defined group of UEs (i.e. a set of UEs), it is done through a set of policies for individual UEs.
Identification of groups of UEs
In the scope of A1 policies, a pre-defined group of UEs can be implicitly identified based on a UE group identifier.
The following UE group identifiers are possible:
SPID [8].
When the near-RT RIC receives a UE group identifier in an A1 policy, it may resolve it into a set of UEids that are present in the nodes controlled by the near-RT RIC and applies the policy statements to each one of the UEs.
A group of UEs can also be identified by using a slice identifier or an application group identifier below.
Identification of slices
In the scope of A1 policies, the following identifiers can be used to implicitly identify a pre-defined group of UEs or a group of QoS flows:
S-NSSAI [9];
When the near-RT RIC receives a slice identifier in an A1 policy, it may resolve it into a set of UE identifiers and a set of QoS flow identifiers that are present in the nodes controlled by the near-RT RIC and applies the policy statements to each one of the UEs or the QoS flows.
Identification of applications
In the scope of A1 policies, the following identifiers can be used to implicitly identify a group of applications as well as group of UEs:
5QI [9];
When the near-RT RIC receives an application group identifier in an A1 policy, it may resolve it into a set of QoS flow identifiers (that are related to the applications that the non-RT RIC is intending to optimize) and the set of UEIds (that are present in the nodes controlled by the near-RT RIC) for which they apply. Then it applies the policy statements to each one of the UEs and QoS flows.
Identification of cells
In the scope of A1 policies, a part of the radio network can be identified based on a cell identifier (CellID).
The following cell identifiers are possible:
CellId [10];
When the scope identifier in an A1 policy is a cell identifier, the policy statement may contain policy resources and the policy implicitly has impact on all UEs handled by the specified cell(s).
If the non-RT RIC needs to express policies for a group of cells (i.e. a set of cells), it is done through a set of policies for individual cells.
A policy can be applied to all cells (handled by the near-RT RIC) by setting a special value of the CellId.
3.1.5 A1 policy content
In addition to a scope identifier, an A1 policy contains policy statements. There are several kinds of policy statements that cover policy objectives and policy resources.
NOTE:	The detailed rules for how to formulate policy statements, and which combinations of identifiers and statements that are allowed, are specified in [A12].
3.1.5.1	Policy objectives
The following types of policy objectives are defined:
3.1.5.1.1	QoS targets
QoS targets are expressed using QoS attributes defined in [9]. Applicable QoS attributes are defined in [12].
3.1.5.1.2	QoE targets
QoE targets are expressed using a MOS-like attribute as e.g. described in [13]. Applicable QoE attributes are defined in [12].
3.1.5.1.3	KQI targets
KQI targets are expressed using KQI attributes defined in [14]. Applicable KQI attributes are defined in [12].
3.1.5.1.4	KPI targets
KPI targets are expressed using KPI attributes defined in [15]. Applicable KPI attributes are defined in [12].
Policy resources
The following types of policy resources are defined:
Traffic steering preferences
Traffic steering preference attributes [12] are used to select cell for a connection, or schedule traffic on available cells, in a different way than what would be done through default behaviour.
System efficiency
System efficiency attributes [12] are used to optimize RAN resources in cells and nodes.
3.2 A1 Enrichment Information
3.2.1 Introduction
The purpose of A1 Enrichment Information is to enable the near-RT RIC to improve its RAN optimization performance by utilizing information that is not available within the RAN. The information sources can be O-RAN internal and O-RAN external, and the derived A1 Enrichment Information is provided by the non-RT RIC over the A1 interface.
There are different types of A1 Enrichment Information referred to as EI types. A near-RT RIC may not need to use all EI types, and a specific function in the near-RT RIC may only need one specific type of A1 Enrichment Information.
An EI type is identified by the A1 Enrichment Information ID (EiId). Based on the EiId, information is provided about the A1 Enrichment Information properties and how to request delivery of the A1 Enrichment Information.
The near-RT RIC can discover available EiIds over A1 and request delivery of A1 Enrichment Information related to an available EiId. The non-RT RIC controls the access to A1 Enrichment Information and how the connection for delivery of the enrichment information is made.
NOTE: There may be functions in the SMO or the non-RT RIC that also utilize enrichment information for their tasks, it may be the same or different enrichment information as exposed over the A1 interface. This is outside the scope of this specification to describe.
3.2.2 The enrichment information function
The enrichment information function is used by the non-RT RIC to produce and make A1 Enrichment Information available to the near-RT RIC. The non-RT RIC is responsible for exposure and secure delivery of A1 Enrichment Information.
The function is used to publish available EiIds over A1.
The function is used to deliver A1 Enrichment Information for an EiId on request or based on subscription.
3.2.3 Life cycle aspects of A1 Enrichment Information
3.2.3.1 	Registration of enrichment information source
Before the non-RT RIC can provide a certain EiId over A1, the SMO needs to set-up the collection of input information from O-RAN internal and/or external sources and the non-RT RIC needs set-up the functions that will produce the enrichment information based on the input information and deliver it.
The non-RT RIC will also set up access control rules and select which EiIds that are exposed to a near-RT RIC.
3.2.3.2 	Discovery of enrichment information
Before a near-RT RIC can use A1 Enrichment Information it needs to identify that the needed EiId is available and how to access it.
The near-RT RIC can discover available EiIds using A1-EI. The non-RT RIC controls which EiIds are discoverable and accessible.
For a specific EiId, the near-RT RIC can request a detailed description of the enrichment information provided and how to formulate a request for delivery of it.
3.2.3.3 	Request and Delivery of enrichment information
A1 Enrichment Information can be delivered to the near-RT RIC in different ways depending on the type of the A1 Enrichment Information or on the needs from the using internal function or application.
A1 Enrichment Information can be delivered on per need basis, due an event or continuously. For continuous delivery, different mechanisms can be used depending on the volume of enrichment information to be delivered.
Following the discovery of that an EiId is available, the request and delivery of A1 Enrichment Information is done in two steps:
First the near-RT RIC requests over A1 to get A1 Enrichment Information for the EiId by creating an EI Job. The response contains a service description for the confirmed delivery of A1 Enrichment Information.
Then the non-RT RIC sets up the appropriate connection and delivers A1 Enrichment Information according to the agreed details for the EI Job.
3.2.4 Identification of A1 Enrichment Information
A1 Enrichment Information is identified by the A1 Enrichment Information ID (EiId). Different types of A1 Enrichment Information have different EiIds.
The near-RT RIC can request delivery of A1 Enrichment Information from the non-RT RIC by creating an EI Job for an EiId. The EI Job is identified by an EI Job identifier (EiJobId) assigned by the non-RT RIC.
3.2.5 A1 Enrichment Information format and delivery
3.2.5.1	Push based delivery
When A1 Enrichment Information has been produced during an EI job, it is pushed from the non-RT RIC to the near-RT RIC. This can be done once, regularly or event based depending on the conditions set for the EI Job.
Signalling procedures of the A1 interface
The procedures listed in this chapter are defined in detail in the A1 Application Protocol specification [12].
4.1 Policy related procedures
Policy related procedures include:
Query Policy Type procedure;
Create Policy procedure;
Query Policy procedure;
Update Policy procedure;
Delete Policy procedure;
Feedback Policy procedure;
4.2 ML Model related procedures
Void
4.3 Enrichment information transfer procedures
A1 Enrichment Information related procedures include:
For EI Discovery:
Query EI identities;
Query EI type.
For EI Job Control:
Query EI job identities;
Create EI job;
Query EI job;
Update EI job;
Delete EI job;
Query EI job status;
Notify EI job status.
For EI Delivery:
Deliver EI result.
A1 interface protocol structure
The protocol stack of the A1 interface is shown on Figure 5-1. The transport network layer is built on IP transport. For the reliable transport of messages, HTTS is added on top of IP. The application layer protocol is based on a RESTful approach with transfer of JSON formatted policy statements.
The detailed description is provided in the A1 Transport Protocol specification [15].
Figure 5-1: Illustration of the A1 protocol stack
Other A1 interface specifications
The present document is part of a TS-family covering the O-RAN WG2: A1 interface. The other two specifications cover Transport and Application aspects.
6.1 A1 interface: Transport
The A1 Transport Protocol specification [15] defines how the A1 protocol stack is based on TCP/IP, HTTP/1.1 over TLS and JSON as data interchange format.
6.2 A1 interface: Application Protocol
The A1 Application Protocol specification [12] defines the service framework, the service operations and the service APIs for the A1 services. URIs, objects and attributes are defined for HTTP based procedures and JSON examples of policy objects are provided.
Annex
BY DOWNLOADING, USING OR OTHERWISE ACCESSING ANY O-RAN SPECIFICATION, ADOPTER AGREES TO THE TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT.
This O-RAN Adopter License Agreement (the “Agreement”) is made by and between the O-RAN Alliance and the entity that downloads, uses or otherwise accesses any O-RAN Specification, including its Affiliates (the “Adopter”).
This is a license agreement for entities who wish to adopt any O-RAN Specification.
SECTION 1:  DEFINITIONS
1.1		“Affiliate” means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with another entity, so long as such control exists.  For the purpose of this Section, “Control” means beneficial ownership of fifty (50%) percent or more of the voting stock or equity in an entity.
1.2		“Compliant Portion” means only those specific portions of products (hardware, software or combinations thereof) that implement any O-RAN Specification.
1.3	 	“Adopter(s)” means all entities, who are not Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors, including their Affiliates, who wish to download, use or otherwise access O-RAN Specifications.
1.4		“Minor Update” means an update or revision to an O-RAN Specification published by O-RAN Alliance that does not add any significant new features or functionality and remains interoperable with the prior version of an O-RAN Specification.  The term “O-RAN Specifications” includes Minor Updates.
1.5		“Necessary Claims” means those claims of all present and future patents and patent applications, other than design patents and design registrations, throughout the world, which (i) are owned or otherwise licensable by a Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor during the term of its Member, Contributor or Academic Contributorship; (ii) such Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor has the right to grant a license without the payment of consideration to a third party; and (iii) are necessarily infringed by implementation of a Final Specification (without considering any Contributions not included in the Final Specification). A claim is necessarily infringed only when it is not possible on technical (but not commercial) grounds, taking into account normal technical practice and the state of the art generally available at the date any Final Specification was published by the O-RAN Alliance or the date the patent claim first came into existence, whichever last occurred, to make, sell, lease, otherwise dispose of, repair, use or operate an implementation which complies with a Final Specification without infringing that claim. For the avoidance of doubt in exceptional cases where a Final Specification can only be implemented by technical solutions, all of which infringe patent claims, all such patent claims shall be considered Necessary Claims.
1.6		“Defensive Suspension” means for the purposes of any license grant pursuant to Section 3, Member, Contributor, Academic Contributor, Adopter, or any of their Affiliates, may have the discretion to include in their license a term allowing the licensor to suspend the license against a licensee who brings a patent infringement suit against the licensing Member, Contributor, Academic Contributor, Adopter, or any of their Affiliates.
SECTION 2: COPYRIGHT LICENSE
2.1		Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, O-RAN Alliance hereby grants to Adopter a nonexclusive, nontransferable, irrevocable, non-sublicensable, worldwide copyright license to obtain, use and modify O-RAN Specifications, but not to further distribute such O-RAN Specification in any modified or unmodified way, solely in furtherance of implementations of an O-RAN Specification.
2.2		Adopter shall not use O-RAN Specifications except as expressly set forth in this Agreement or in a separate written agreement with O-RAN Alliance.
SECTION 3: FRAND LICENSE
3.1		Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors and their Affiliates are prepared to grant based on a separate Patent License Agreement to each Adopter under Fair, Reasonable And Non-Discriminatory (FRAND) terms and conditions with or without compensation (royalties) a nonexclusive, non-transferable, irrevocable (but subject to Defensive Suspension), non-sublicensable,  worldwide license under their Necessary Claims to make, have made, use, import, offer to sell, lease, sell and otherwise distribute Compliant Portions; provided, however, that such license shall not extend: (a) to any part or function of a product in which a Compliant Portion is incorporated that is not itself part of the Compliant Portion; or (b) to any Adopter if that Adopter is not making a reciprocal grant to Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors, as set forth in Section 3.3.  For the avoidance of doubt, the foregoing license includes the distribution by the Adopter’s distributors and the use by the Adopter’s customers of such licensed Compliant Portions.
3.2 	Notwithstanding the above, if any Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor, Adopter or their Affiliates has reserved the right to charge a FRAND royalty or other fee for its license of Necessary Claims to Adopter, then Adopter is entitled to charge a FRAND royalty or other fee to such Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor, Adopter and its Affiliates for its license of Necessary Claims to its licensees.
3.3		Adopter, on behalf of itself and its Affiliates, shall be prepared to grant based on a separate Patent License Agreement to each Members, Contributors, Academic Contributors, Adopters and their Affiliates under FRAND terms and conditions with or without compensation (royalties) a nonexclusive, non-transferable, irrevocable (but subject to Defensive Suspension), non-sublicensable,  worldwide license under their Necessary Claims to make, have made, use, import, offer to sell, lease, sell and otherwise distribute Compliant Portions; provided, however, that such license will not extend: (a) to any part or function of a product in which a Compliant Portion is incorporated that is not itself part of the Compliant Portion; or (b) to any Members, Contributors, Academic Contributors, Adopters and their Affiliates that is not making a reciprocal grant to Adopter, as set forth in Section 3.1.  For the avoidance of doubt, the foregoing license includes the distribution by the Members’, Contributors’, Academic Contributors’, Adopters’ and their Affiliates’ distributors and the use by the Members’, Contributors’, Academic Contributors’, Adopters’ and their Affiliates’ customers of such licensed Compliant Portions.
SECTION 4:  TERM AND TERMINATION
4.1		This Agreement shall remain in force, unless early terminated according to this Section 4.
4.2		O-RAN Alliance on behalf of its Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors may terminate this Agreement if Adopter materially breaches this Agreement and does not cure or is not capable of curing such breach within thirty (30) days after being given notice specifying the breach.
4.3		Sections 1, 3, 5 - 11 of this Agreement shall survive any termination of this Agreement.  Under surviving Section 3, after termination of this Agreement, Adopter will continue to grant licenses (a) to entities who become Adopters after the date of termination; and (b) for future versions of O-RAN Specifications that are backwards compatible with the version that was current as of the date of termination.
SECTION 5: CONFIDENTIALITY
Adopter will use the same care and discretion to avoid disclosure, publication, and dissemination of O-RAN Specifications to third parties, as Adopter employs with its own confidential information, but no less than reasonable care.  Any disclosure by Adopter to its Affiliates, contractors and consultants should be subject to an obligation of confidentiality at least as restrictive as those contained in this Section.  The foregoing obligation shall not apply to any information which is: (1) rightfully known by Adopter without any limitation on use or disclosure prior to disclosure; (2) publicly available through no fault of Adopter; (3) rightfully received without a duty of confidentiality; (4) disclosed by O-RAN Alliance or a Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor to a third party without a duty of confidentiality on such third party; (5) independently developed by Adopter; (6) disclosed pursuant to the order of a court or other authorized governmental body, or as required by law, provided that Adopter provides reasonable prior written notice to O-RAN Alliance, and cooperates with O-RAN Alliance and/or the applicable Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor to have the opportunity to oppose any such order; or (7) disclosed by Adopter with O-RAN Alliance’s prior written approval.
SECTION 6:  INDEMNIFICATION
Adopter shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the O-RAN Alliance, its Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors, and their employees, and agents and their respective successors, heirs and assigns (the “Indemnitees”), against any liability, damage, loss, or expense (including reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses) incurred by or imposed upon any of the Indemnitees in connection with any claims, suits, investigations, actions, demands or judgments arising out of Adopter’s use of the licensed O-RAN Specifications or Adopter’s commercialization of products that comply with O-RAN Specifications.
SECTION 7:  LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY; NO WARRANTY
EXCEPT FOR BREACH OF CONFIDENTIALITY, ADOPTER’S BREACH OF SECTION 3, AND ADOPTER’S INDEMNIFICATION OBLIGATIONS, IN NO EVENT SHALL ANY PARTY BE LIABLE TO ANY OTHER PARTY OR THIRD PARTY FOR ANY INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, PUNITIVE OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES RESULTING FROM ITS PERFORMANCE OR NON-PERFORMANCE UNDER THIS AGREEMENT, IN EACH CASE WHETHER UNDER CONTRACT, TORT, WARRANTY, OR OTHERWISE, AND WHETHER OR NOT SUCH PARTY HAD ADVANCE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
O-RAN SPECIFICATIONS ARE PROVIDED “AS IS” WITH NO WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS WHATSOEVER, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHERWISE.  THE O-RAN ALLIANCE AND THE MEMBERS, CONTRIBUTORS OR ACADEMIC CONTRIBUTORS EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION OF MERCHANTABILITY, SECURITY, SATISFACTORY QUALITY, NONINFRINGEMENT, FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ERROR-FREE OPERATION, OR ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION FOR O-RAN SPECIFICATIONS.
SECTION 8:  ASSIGNMENT
Adopter may not assign the Agreement or any of its rights or obligations under this Agreement or make any grants or other sublicenses to this Agreement, except as expressly authorized hereunder, without having first received the prior, written consent of the O-RAN Alliance, which consent may be withheld in O-RAN Alliance’s sole discretion.  O-RAN Alliance may freely assign this Agreement.
SECTION 9:  THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY RIGHTS
Adopter acknowledges and agrees that Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors (including future Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors) are entitled to rights as a third-party beneficiary under this Agreement, including as licensees under Section 3.
SECTION 10:  BINDING ON AFFILIATES
Execution of this Agreement by Adopter in its capacity as a legal entity or association constitutes that legal entity’s or association’s agreement that its Affiliates are likewise bound to the obligations that are applicable to Adopter hereunder and are also entitled to the benefits of the rights of Adopter hereunder.
SECTION 11:  GENERAL
This Agreement is governed by the laws of Germany without regard to its conflict or choice of law provisions.
This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties as to its express subject matter and expressly supersedes and replaces any prior or contemporaneous agreements between the parties, whether written or oral, relating to the subject matter of this Agreement.
Adopter, on behalf of itself and its Affiliates, agrees to comply at all times with all applicable laws, rules and regulations with respect to its and its Affiliates’ performance under this Agreement, including without limitation, export control and antitrust laws.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, Adopter acknowledges that this Agreement prohibits any communication that would violate the antitrust laws.
By execution hereof, no form of any partnership, joint venture or other special relationship is created between Adopter, or O-RAN Alliance or its Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors.  Except as expressly set forth in this Agreement, no party is authorized to make any commitment on behalf of Adopter, or O-RAN Alliance or its Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors.
In the event that any provision of this Agreement conflicts with governing law or if any provision is held to be null, void or otherwise ineffective or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, (i) such provisions will be deemed stricken from the contract, and (ii) the remaining terms, provisions, covenants and restrictions of this Agreement will remain in full force and effect.
Any failure by a party or third party beneficiary to insist upon or enforce performance by another party of any of the provisions of this Agreement or to exercise any rights or remedies under this Agreement or otherwise by law shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment to any extent of the other parties’ or third party beneficiary’s right to assert or rely upon any such provision, right or remedy in that or any other instance; rather the same shall be and remain in full force and effect.