Contents
List of figures	3
List of tables	3
Foreword	4
Modal verbs terminology	4
1	Scope	5
2	References	5
2.1	Normative references	5
2.2	Informative references	5
3	Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations	6
3.1	Terms	6
3.2	Symbols	6
3.3	Abbreviations	6
4	SCM Background	6
4.1	Introduction	6
4.2	Considerations	7
5	Study and identify the security gaps related to SCM	7
5.1	Assets	7
5.1.1   	 O-RAN Architecture Elements	7
5.1.2   	 O-RAN interfaces	7
5.2	Security Controls	8
5.3	Input recommendations	8
5.4	Threat template	8
5.5	SCM Threats analysis	8
5.5.1   	 Certificate related threats	8
5.5.2   	  NACM related threats	9
5.5.3   	  LDAP related threats	9
6	Study and recommendation related to SCM	9
7	Conclusion	9
Annex: Change history/Change request (history)	10
List of figures
No table of figures entries found.
List of tables
No table of figures entries found.
Foreword
This Technical Report (TR) has been produced by WG11 of the O-RAN ALLIANCE.
The content of the present document is subject to continuing work within O-RAN and may change following formal O-RAN approval. Should the O-RAN Alliance modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN with an identifying change of version date and an increase in version number as follows:
version xx.yy.zz
where:
xx:	the first digit-group is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have xx=01).  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
yy:	the second digit-group is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
zz:	the third digit-group included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process. External versions never include the third digit-group.  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
Modal verbs terminology
In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the O-RAN Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).
"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in O-RAN deliverables except when used in direct citation.
Scope
The main objective for this work item is to identify and develop the security management YANG models for O-RAN framework fulfilling the security requirements specified in [i.2]. The specification will be based on the YANG data modeling language (see RFC 7950). Security YANG models in O-RAN will apply to relevant O-RAN interfaces (O1, Open Fronthaul M-plane). This work item will perform the following steps,
Identify if there is any existing security management YANG model available in O-RAN specifications
Study and recommend the security requirement for YANG model aligning with [i.2]
Study and identify the gaps related to security configuration
Study the YANG models for certificate configuration
Study the YANG models for NETCONF access control such as NACM configuration
Study the YANG models for LDAP configuration
References
Normative references
Not applicable.
Informative references
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. In the case of a reference to a 3GPP document, a non-specific reference implicitly refers to the latest version of that document in Release 18, or the latest 3GPP release prior to Release 18 that includes that document.
NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, O-RAN cannot guarantee their long-term validity.
The following referenced documents are not necessary for the application of the present document, but they assist the user with regard to a particular subject area.
O-RAN WG11: "O-RAN Security Protocols Specification".
O-RAN WG11: "O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls Specification".
O-RAN WG11: "O-RAN Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment".
O-RAN WG11:  "O-RAN Security Test Specifications".
O-RAN WG4: "O-RAN Management Plane Specification".
IETF RFC 7950: "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language".
O-RAN WG10: " O-RAN Information Model and Data Models Specification".
O-RAN WG10: " O1 Network Resource Model Specification".
O-RAN WG4: " Cooperative Transport Interface Transport Management Procedures Specification".
O-RAN WG5: "O1 Interface specification for O-DU".
O-RAN WG5: "O1 Interface specification for O-CU-UP and O-CU-CP".
An extensible YANG validator and converter in python, https://github.com/mbj4668/pyang.
O-RAN WG1: "O-RAN Architecture Description".
O-RAN WG10: "O-RAN Operations and Maintenance Interface Specification".
Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations
Terms
For the purposes of the present document, the terms [given in [i.1] and the following] apply:
Open Fronthaul M-Plane: Management interface controlling the O-RU, generally driven from the O-DU but in the case of the hybrid topology also driven from the SMO as specified in [i.13].
NOTE 1: Please refer to [i.5] for more details.
O1: Interface used by the SMO framework, as specified in Clause 5.3.1, for operation and management of O-RAN NFs as specified in [i.13] [i.14].
O-Cloud: Cloud platform that provides O-RAN standardized interfaces, hosting O-RAN defined software components.
SMO: A Service Management and Orchestration framework.
NOTE 2: Please refer to Clause 5.3.1 for more details as specified in [i.13].
Symbols
Void
Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations [given in [i.1]and the following] apply:
LDAP 	Lightweight directory access protocol
NACM 	NETCONF Access Control Model
NETCONF	Network Configuration Protocol
NF		Network Function
O-RAN	Open Radio Access Network
O-Cloud	O-RAN Cloud
PNF		Physical Network Function
SMO		Service Management and Orchestration
VNF		Virtualised Network Function
YANG	Yet Another Next Generation
SCM Background
Introduction
Management of security configuration is currently not handled in a consistent way in O-RAN. Different work groups see the topic in different ways. In some cases, this is expected to be a topic only for the security work group while in other cases it is defined within a work group.
For example, there are YANG models related to NACM included in WG4 definitions for Open Fronthaul M-plane. For O1, there are security requirements on NACM stated in [i.2]. There may be other areas where security configuration such as LDAP configuration, NACM configuration, Certificate Management configuration is required. Some of the security requirements related to NACM, LDAP are defined in [i.2].
There are several discussions on O1 security configuration aspects such as NACM, etc happening across O-RAN WGs (WG11, W10, etc) showing a need to have Security Configuration Management specifications in O-RAN.
Considerations
This document makes the following considerations:
This TR performs a detailed study of the Security Configuration Management for O1 interface and Open Fronthaul M-plane.
The existing O-RAN specifications such as  O-RAN.WG10.Information Model and Data Models [i.7], O-RAN.WG10.O1NRM.1 [i.8], O-RAN.WG4.MP-YANGs [i5], O-RAN.WG4.CTI-TMP-YANG [i.9], O-RAN.WG5.O-DU-O1.1 [i.10], O-RAN.WG5.O-CU-O1.0 [i.11] discuss the YANG models which are considered as the baseline specifications for the Security Configuration Management TR to identify and develop the security YANG models for O-RAN framework fulfilling the security requirements specified in [i.2].
The Security YANG model considers the rules and guideline as specified in O-RAN specifications [i.5] [i.7] [i.8] [i.9] [i.10] [i.11].
The pyang YANG validator tool is considered for evaluating the security YANG model as recommended in [i.12].
The recommended security YANG models for O1 interface provided in this report to be shared with the impacted O-RAN Alliance working group, such as WG4 and WG10.
Study and identify the security gaps related to SCM
Editor’s note: This clause will study and identify the security gaps related to security configuration management like NACM, certificate and LDAP aligning with SRCS and SPS.
Assets
This document makes the following considerations:
5.1.1   	 O-RAN Architecture Elements
ASSET-C-01:	Logical module: Service Management and Orchestration (SMO)
ASSET-C-02:	Near-RT RIC software
ASSET-C-03:	O-CU-CP software
ASSET-C-04:	O-CU-UP software
ASSET-C-05:	O-DU software
ASSET-C-06:	O-RU software
ASSET-C-07: O-eNB
ASSET-C-31: Shared O-RU
5.1.2   	 O-RAN interfaces
ASSET-C-22: O1 interface, including protocol stack
ASSET-C-24: Open FH M-plane, including protocol stack
Security Controls
The following security controls should be considered for the security gap analysis:
Control-1: Certificate Management
Control-2: TLS
Control-3: mTLS
Control-4: SSH
Control-5: NACM with NETCONF
Control-6: MACsec
Control-7: IPsec
Control-8: 802.1X
Input recommendations
The following are considered for security configuration management gap analysis:
Certificate configuration
NETCONF access control, NACM configuration
LDAP configuration
Threat template
SCM Threats analysis
5.5.1   	 Certificate related threats
5.5.2   	  NACM related threats
Void
5.5.3   	  LDAP related threats
Void
Study and recommendation related to SCM
Editor’s note: This clause will study and recommend the security requirements and security usecases related to security configuration management like NACM, Certificate and LDAP aligning with SRCS and SPS.
Void
Conclusion
Editor’s note : This clause will provide the summary for the SCM TR.
Void
Annex:
Change history/Change request (history)