O-RAN.WG11.TR.ZTA-R004-v02.00
Technical Report
O-RAN Work Group 11 (Security Work Group)
Study on Zero Trust Architecture for O-RAN
Copyright © 2025 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.
The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this document in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material of this document for your personal use, or copy the material of this document for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.
O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V., Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany
Register of Associations, Bonn VR 11238, VAT ID DE321720189
Contents
List of figures	4
List of tables	5
Foreword	7
Modal verbs terminology	7
Introduction	7
1	Scope	8
2	References	9
2.1	Normative references	9
2.2	Informative references	9
3	Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations	10
3.1	Terms	10
3.2	Symbols	11
3.3	Abbreviations	11
4	NIST Zero Trust Tenet Applicability	13
4.1	NIST ZT Tenets overview	13
4.2	NIST ZT Tenets applicability study	13
4.2.1	ZT Tenet 1 Applicability Study	13
4.2.2	ZT Tenet 2 Applicability Study	14
4.2.3	ZT Tenet 3 Applicability Study	15
4.2.4	ZT Tenet 4 Applicability Study	16
4.2.5	ZT Tenet 5 Applicability Study	17
4.2.6	ZT Tenet 6 Applicability Study	18
4.2.7	ZT Tenet 7 Applicability Study	19
4.3	NIST ZT Tenets applicability summary	20
5	ZTA Assets	22
5.1	Asset Categories	22
5.2	Defined Assets	23
5.3	New Assets	23
5.3.1	New Assets in the SMO	23
5.3.2	O-Cloud Assets	25
5.3.3	New Assets in the Open Fronthaul	26
5.3.4	New Assets in F1 (Midhaul)	26
6	Reference ZTA Security Requirements	28
6.1	ZTA Framework	28
6.1.1	Introduction	28
6.1.2	CISA's Zero Trust Maturity Model (ZTMM)	28
6.1.3	DoD Zero Trust Strategy and Reference Architecture	28
6.1.4	Comparison of ZTMM models	30
6.1.5	Selection of CISA ZTMM Model	30
6.2	Target ZTA Security Requirements	31
6.2.1	Introduction	31
6.2.2	Identity	31
6.2.3	Devices	33
6.2.4	Networks	35
6.2.5	Applications and Workloads	37
6.2.6	Data	40
6.2.7	Cross-Cutting Capabilities	43
7	Alignment to Target ZTA Requirements	50
7.1	Introduction	50
7.2	Current O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls	50
7.3	Gap Analysis	51
7.3.1	Gap Analysis Methodology	51
7.3.2	Transversal Functions	53
7.3.3	xApp and Near-RT RIC Gap Analysis	53
7.3.4	E2 Interface Gap Analysis	62
7.3.5	Y1 Interface Gap Analysis	64
7.3.6	rApp and Non-RT RIC Gap Analysis	66
7.3.7	A1 Interface Gap Analysis	72
7.3.8	R1 Interface Gap Analysis	74
7.3.9	SMO Gap Analysis	75
7.3.10	O1 Interface Gap Analysis	75
7.3.11	O-Cloud Gap Analysis	79
7.3.12	O2 Interface Gap Analysis	86
7.3.13	O-CU Gap Analysis	88
7.3.14	O-DU Gap Analysis	94
7.3.15	O-RU Gap Analysis	100
7.3.16	Open Fronthaul Gap Analysis	106
7.4	WG11 Considerations for Mapping Security Controls to CISA ZTMM	108
7.4.1	Introduction	108
7.4.2	Mapping to CISA ZTMM	109
8	ZTA Threats	110
8.1	Introduction	110
8.2	Mapping of the existing Security Principles to ZT Tenets	110
8.3	Existing defined threats	111
8.4	New threats	111
9	Threat analysis	112
10	Risk assessment	113
11	Recommendations	114
Annex:  Change history/Change request (history)	115
List of figures
Figure 6.1-1: CISA Zero Trust Maturity Model	28
Figure 6.1-2: DoD ZT Capabilities	29
Figure 6.1-3: Comparison of US CISA and DoD ZTMM	30
Figure 7.3-1 Gap Analysis Workflow	52
List of tables
Table 4.3-1: NIST ZT Tenet Applicability Summary	21
Table 5.2-1: High Level ZTA Assets for O-RAN	23
Table 5.3-1: SMO Assets	23
Table 5.3-2: O-Cloud Assets	25
Table 5.3-3: Open Fronthaul Assets	26
Table 5.3-4: F1 Assets	26
Table 7.2-1: Mandatory O-RAN interface security controls (See NOTE for 802.1X1 and PDCP2)	50
Table 7.2-2: O-RAN Cross-Platform Security Requirements	51
Table 7.3-1 Mapping of O-RAN Assets and Other Components to Different Pillars	52
Table 7.3-2: xApp and Near-RT RIC Data Pillar Gap Analysis	54
Table 7.3-3: xApp and Near-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis	58
Table 7.3-4: xApp and Near-RT RIC Identity Pillar Gap Analysis	60
Table 7.3-5: xApp and Near-RT RIC Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	62
Table 7.3-6: E2 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis	63
Table 7.3-7: E2 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	64
Table 7.3-8: Y1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis	65
Table 7.3-9: Y1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	66
Table 7.3-10: rApp and Non-RT RIC Data Pillar Gap Analysis	67
Table 7.3-11: rApp and Non-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis	69
Table 7.3-12: rApp and Non-RT RIC Identity Pillar Gap Analysis	70
Table 7.3-13: A1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis	72
Table 7.3-14: A1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	74
Table 7.3-15: R1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis	74
Table 7.3-16: R1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	75
Table 7.3-17: O1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis	76
Table 7.3-18: O1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	78
Table 7.3-19: O-Cloud Data Pillar Gap Analysis	79
Table 7.3-20: O-Cloud Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis	82
Table 7.3-21: O-Cloud Identity Pillar Gap Analysis	84
Table 7.3-22: O-Cloud Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	85
Table 7.3-23: O-Cloud Devices Pillar Gap Analysis	86
Table 7.3-24: O2 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis	86
Table 7.3-25: O2 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	88
Table 7.3-26: O-CU Data Pillar Gap Analysis	89
Table 7.3-27: O-CU Application and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis	91
Table 7.3-28: O-CU Identity Pillar Gap Analysis	93
Table 7.3-29: O-CU Devices Pillar Gap Analysis	94
Table 7.3-30: O-DU Data Pillar Gap Analysis	95
Table 7.3-31: O-DU Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis	97
Table 7.3-32: O-DU Identity Pillar Gap Analysis	99
Table 7.3-33: O-DU Devices Pillar Gap Analysis	100
Table 7.3-34: O-RU Data Pillar Gap Analysis	101
Table 7.3-35: O-RU Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis	103
Table 7.3-36: O-RU Identity Pillar Gap Analysis	104
Table 7.3-37: O-RU Devices Pillar Gap Analysis	105
Table 7.3-38: Open Fronthaul Data Pillar Gap Analysis	106
Table 7.3-39: Open Fronthaul Networks Pillar Gap Analysis	107
Table 7.4-1: CISA ZTMM Mapping of O-RAN security controls	109
Table 8.2-1: Mapping of security principles to ZT tenets1	110
Foreword
This Technical Report (TR) has been produced by O-RAN Alliance.
Modal verbs terminology
In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the O-RAN Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).
"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in O-RAN deliverables except when used in direct citation.
Introduction
In today's era of digital transformation, the complexity of a typical enterprise's infrastructure—encompassing multiple internal networks, remote offices, mobile users, and cloud services—has outstripped legacy perimeter-based network security methods, as there is no longer a single, easily identifiable perimeter for the enterprise [i.6]. The majority of cyber-attacks targeting applications and workloads stem from inadequate access control. Poor management of user, service, and device identities and credentials, along with the use of weak authentication mechanisms such as passwords, are often the underlying causes of security breaches.
This complexity has led to the development of a new model for cybersecurity known as "Zero trust" (ZT). Zero trust responds to enterprise network trends such as remote users, bring your own device (BYOD) policies, and cloud-based assets not located within an enterprise-owned network boundary, which is a typical use case for O-RAN. Preventing lateral movement is crucial for protecting O-RAN from attackers who typically attempt lateral movement after initially exploiting the network. Traditional remote access solutions, such as VPNs, lack control over insider attacks and grant access to all on-site data, applications, and resources. Mitigating the risk of insider threats, breaches, and data exposure is essential to protecting O-RAN assets and resources.
Zero trust is an evolving set of cybersecurity paradigms that shifts defenses from static, network-based perimeters to focus on users, assets, and resources. It assumes no implicit trust is granted to assets or user accounts based solely on their physical or network location or asset ownership. Zero trust provides a collection of concepts and ideas designed to minimize uncertainty in enforcing accurate, least-privilege per-request access decisions in information systems and services, even in a network viewed as compromised. The approach focuses on authentication, authorization, and shrinking implicit trust zones while maintaining availability and minimizing temporal delays in authentication mechanisms. Access rules are made as granular as possible to enforce the least privileges needed to perform the action in the request [i.6].
Scope
The contents of the present document are subject to continuing work within O-RAN and may change following formal O-RAN approval. Should the O-RAN Alliance modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN with an identifying change of version date and an increase in version number as follows:
version xx.yy.zz
where:
xx:	the first digit-group is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have xx=01).  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
yy:	the second digit-group is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
zz:	the third digit-group included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process. External versions never include the third digit-group.  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) is applicable to protect O-RAN architecture elements, interfaces, and data. This technical report studies the state of O-RAN's Zero Trust security posture with respect to the NIST publications [i.6] [i.7] and their seven tenets of zero trust. This report identifies new zero trust assets, threats, risks, and security controls in pursuit of a ZTA while considering those already existing in WG11 specifications.
This technical report includes the following activities:
Applicability study of NIST seven tenets of zero trust to O-RAN Security Architecture
Identification of Zero Trust assets
Identification of ZTA threats using STRIDE
ZTA risk assessment
Determination of ZTA security controls
Gap analysis between target ZTA security controls and existing security controls
Proposal of new ZTA recommendations, requirements, and security controls
This technical report makes the following considerations:
The technical report takes into consideration existing WG11 technical reports and specifications and may inform of the associated assets, threats, risks, and security controls.
The O-RAN ALLIANCE is pursuing a zero-trust architecture (ZTA) for its specifications based upon NIST SP 800-207 [i.6].
References
Normative references
Normative references are not applicable in the present document.
Informative references
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. In the case of a reference to a 3GPP document, a non-specific reference implicitly refers to the latest version of that document in Release 18, or the latest 3GPP release prior to Release 18 that includes that document.
NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, O-RAN cannot guarantee their long term validity.
The following referenced documents are not necessary for the application of the present document but they assist the user with regard to a particular subject area.
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Architecture Description"
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls Specifications"
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Protocols Specifications"
O-RAN ALLIANCE TR: "O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment"
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Test Specification"
NIST Special Publication 800-207, "Zero Trust Architecture", August 2020, https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-207
NIST Special Publication 800-207A, "A Zero Trust Architecture Model for Access Control in Cloud-Native Applications in Multi-Cloud Environments", September 2023 https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-207A
Enhanced Zero Trust and 5G, ATIS, July 2023, Enhanced Zero Trust and 5G | ATIS.
Zero Trust Maturity Model, v2.0, US DHS CISA, April 2023. https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/2023-04/zero_trust_maturity_model_v2_508.pdf
3GPP TR 33.894: "3GPP Study on applicability of the zero trust security principles in mobile networks"
"Security guidance for 5g cloud infrastructures", https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/2023-02/security_guidance_for_5g_cloud_infrastructures_part_i_508_compliant.pdf
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "Xhaul Packet Switched Architectures and Solutions"
Embracing a Zero Trust Security Model, US National Security Agency, February 2021. https://media.defense.gov/2021/Feb/25/2002588479/-1/-1/0/CSI_EMBRACING_ZT_SECURITY_MODEL_UOO115131-21.PDF
DoD Zero Trust Reference Architecture, US Department of Defense, July 2022. https://dodcio.defense.gov/Portals/0/Documents/Library/(U)ZT_RA_v2.0(U)_Sep22.pdf .
NSTAC Report to the President on Zero Trust and Trusted Identity Management, NSTAC, 2022.
IEEE Std 802.1X-2020: "IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks--Port-Based Network Access Control", (Revision of IEEE Std 802.1X-2010 Incorporating IEEE Std 802.1Xbx-2014 and IEEE Std 802.1Xck-2018), 28 Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2020.9018454.
3GPP TS 33.501: "Security architecture and procedures for 5G System"
DoD Zero Trust Strategy, US Department of Defense, October 2022. https://dodcio.defense.gov/Portals/0/Documents/Library/DoD-ZTStrategy.pdf
DoD Zero Trust Capability Execution Roadmap (COA 1), DOD CIO, ZT PfMO, January 2023.  https://dodcio.defense.gov/Portals/0/Documents/Library/ZTCapabilityExecutionRoadmap.pdf
NIST Special Publication 800-95 "Guide to Secure Web Services", August 2007, https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-95.pdf
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "Non-RT RIC: Architecture"
"Advancing Zero Trust Maturity Throughout the Visibility and Analytics Pillar", US National Security Agency, May 2024. https://media.defense.gov/2024/May/30/2003475230/-1/-1/0/CSI-VISIBILITY-AND-ANALYTICS-PILLAR.PDF
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: “Near-RT RIC Architecture”
3GPP TS 33.511 “Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for the next generation Node B (gNodeB) network product class”
3GPP TS 33.117 “Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; Catalogue of general security assurance requirements”
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: “O-RAN Management Plane Specification”
O-RAN ALLIANCE TR: "O-RAN Study on Security for Fronthaul CUS-Plane"
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Management interfaces for Transport Network Elements"
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Synchronization Architecture and Solution Specification"
"Advancing Zero Trust Maturity Throughout the Network and Environment Pillar", https://media.defense.gov/2024/Mar/05/2003405462/-1/-1/0/CSI-ZERO-TRUST-NETWORK-ENVIRONMENT-PILLAR.PDF
Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations
Terms
For the purposes of the present document, the following terms apply:
A1: Interface between non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC to enable policy-driven guidance of Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.
E2:  Interface connecting the Near-RT RIC and one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, and one or more O-DUs.
Microsegmentation: Microsegmentation is a security practice of partitioning networks and assets into small, isolated segments based on various attributes such as communication requirements and risk profiles. Fine grained access control mechanisms are used to minimize the permissible communication paths both within and between disjoint segments.
NOTE: 	Microsegmentation is commonly used in zero trust architecture to minimize the threat of attacks from disjoint segments.
Near-RT RIC: O-RAN near-real-time RAN Intelligent Controller: a logical function that enables real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources via fine-grained data collection and actions over E2 interface.
Non-Person Entity (NPE): An entity with a digital identity that acts in cyberspace, but is not a human actor. This can include organizations, hardware devices, software applications, and information artifacts as defined in [i.6].
Non-RT RIC: O-RAN non-real-time RAN Intelligent Controller: a logical function that enables non-real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources, AI/ML workflow including model training and updates, and policy-based guidance of applications/features in Near-RT RIC.
O-CU: O-RAN Central Unit: a logical node hosting O-CU-CP and O-CU-UP
O-CU-CP: O-RAN Central Unit – Control Plane: a logical node hosting the RRC and the control plane part of the PDCP protocol.
O-CU-UP: O-RAN Central Unit – User Plane: a logical node hosting the user plane part of the PDCP protocol and the SDAP protocol.
O-DU: O-RAN Distributed Unit: a logical node hosting RLC/MAC/High-PHY layers based on a lower layer functional split.
O-RU: O-RAN Radio Unit: a logical node hosting Low-PHY layer and RF processing based on a lower layer functional split.
O1: Interface between management entities (NMS/EMS/MANO) and O-RAN managed elements, for operation and management.
O2: Interface between SMO and the O-Cloud to provide cloud resources management and workload management for supporting O-RAN cloudified network functions.
O2dms: Interface between the SMO and the O-Cloud that is responsible for the deployment management services of the NF Deployment.
O2ims: Interface between the SMO and the O-Cloud that is responsible for the infrastructure management services of the NF Deployment.
Open Fronthaul: The interface between O-DU and O-RU logical nodes, including the CUS (Control User Synchronization) Plane and M (Management) Plane, as defined in O-RAN Architecture Description [i.1].
R1: Interface between rApps and Non-RT RIC Framework via which R1 Services can be produced and consumed.
rApps: Non-RT RIC application: an application designed to consume and/or produce R1 services.
Service Management and Orchestration (SMO): The O-RAN Service Management and Orchestration system as specified in the O-RAN Architecture Description (OAD) document [i.1], clause 5.3.1.
xApps: Near-RT RIC application.
Y1: An interface between Near-RT RIC and Y1 consumers, as defined in O-RAN Architecture Description [i.1], clause 5.4.18. The interface enables RAN analytics information exposure from Near-RT RIC.
Symbols
None
Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the following abbreviations apply:
AI/ML	Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning
CM	RAN NF Configuration Management
DME	Data Management and Exposure
DMS	O-Cloud Deployment Management Services
FHGW	Fronthaul Gateway
FHM	Fronthaul Multiplexor
FM		Fault Management
FOCOM		Federated O-Cloud Orchestration and Management
GM	Grand Master
IMS 	O-Cloud Infrastructure Management Services
JEA	Just-Enough-Administration
JIT	Just-In-Time
NFO	Network Function Orchestrator
NPE				Non-Person Entity
O-CU-CP	O-RAN Centralized Unit – Control Plane
O-CU- UP	O-RAN Centralized Unit – User Plane
O-DU	O-RAN Distributed Unit
O-RU	O-RAN Radio Unit
PM	RAN NF Performance Management
RAN	Radio Access Network
RIC	O-RAN RAN Intelligent Controller
SME	Service Management and Exposure
SMO	Service Management and Orchestration
SMOS	SMO Service
TE&IM 			Topology Exposure and Inventory Management
TNE				Transport Node Equipment
UE					User Equipment
UEBA				User and Entity Behaviour Analytics
ZT					Zero Trust
ZTA				Zero Trust Architecture
ZTMM			Zero Trust Maturity Model
NIST Zero Trust Tenet Applicability
NIST ZT Tenets overview
Numerous interpretations and discussions of ZT emphasize the imperative of eliminating wide-area perimeter defences. They define ZT as a transformative shift from a location-centric paradigm to an identity, context, and data-centric approach with fine-grained security controls between users, systems, applications, data, and assets that change over time.  NIST Special Publication 800-207 [i.6] defines ZT through a set of basic tenets that should be involved in zero trust architectures. While acknowledging the ideal nature of these tenets, NIST recognizes that these tenets practical application may differ based on specific strategic considerations. The basic tenets, essential for a comprehensive Zero Trust Architecture, are detailed below:
All data sources and computing services are considered resources. This tenet emphasizes that all classes of devices, ranging from large devices to sensors, and all types of computing services, should be considered as resources that need protection within the Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA), whether they are personally owned or enterprise-owned resources.
All Communication is secured regardless of network location. This means that trust should not be automatically granted based on the device being on the enterprise network infrastructure. Instead, all communication should be conducted in the most secure manner available, protecting confidentiality and integrity, and providing source authentication.
Access to individual enterprise resources is granted on a per-session basis. Trust in the requester is evaluated before access is granted. Moreover, access should be granted with the least privileges needed to complete the task.
Access to resources is determined by dynamic policy—including the observable state of client identity, application/service, and the requesting asset—and may include other behavioural and environmental attributes. These rules and attributes are based on the needs of the business process and an acceptable level of risk. Resource access and action permission policies can vary based on the sensitivity of the resource/data. Least privilege principles are applied to restrict both visibility and accessibility.
The enterprise monitors and measures the integrity and security posture of all owned and associated assets. No asset is inherently trusted. The security posture of the asset needs to be evaluated and considered when evaluating a resource request. An enterprise implementing a ZTA should establish a continuous diagnostics and mitigation (CDM) or a similar system to monitor the state of devices and applications and should apply patches/fixes as needed.
All resource authentication and authorization are dynamic and strictly enforced before access is allowed. This is a constant cycle of obtaining access, scanning and assessing threats, adapting, and continually reevaluating trust in ongoing communication as defined and enforced by policy, striving to achieve a balance of security, availability, usability, and cost-efficiency.
The enterprise collects as much information as possible about the current state of assets, network infrastructure and communications and uses it to improve its security posture. This data should be utilized to improve policy creation and enforcement, and to support contextual access control decisions.
NIST ZT Tenets applicability study
ZT Tenet 1 Applicability Study
Introduction
ZT tenet 1: All data sources and computing services are considered resources.
This tenet underscores the importance of safeguarding all forms of data sources and computing services within the framework of ZTA. Also, an enterprise may decide to classify personally owned devices as resources if they can access enterprise-owned resources.
Applicability Study
This tenet addresses the dynamic shifts in enterprise network trends, encompassing various internal networks, remote offices with distinct local infrastructures, remote individuals, and cloud-based assets existing beyond enterprise-owned network boundaries—common scenarios encountered in Open RAN deployments. The increasing complexity surpasses traditional perimeter-based network security methods, given the absence of a single, easily identifiable enterprise perimeter.
The ZTA approach primarily concentrates on safeguarding data and services but should extend its coverage to include all enterprise assets (devices, infrastructure components, applications, virtual and cloud components) and subjects (end users, applications, and other non-human entities seeking information from resources) [i.6]. Consequently, ZT security models operate on the assumption that an attacker is present in the environment, and no enterprise-owned environment is inherently more trustworthy than a non-enterprise-owned one. Addressing this tenet becomes imperative for establishing robust security measures within such contexts.
In the context of a ZT-based O-RAN architecture adhering to ZT tenet 1, each data source and computing service in the O-RAN system should be considered a resource. As depicted in [i.8], this tenet necessitates the system owner to identify resources within the 5GS, enabling the construction of the ZTA around these resources. In the 5G landscape, network assets, including UEs, RAN, transport, Core, applications, and services, are acknowledged as assets and data sources with distinct system owners. Computer resources running NFs and applications are also recognized as assets.
Conclusion
The significance of Zero Trust Architecture's first tenet is notably pronounced in the context of O-RAN deployments. By emphasizing the safeguarding of data sources and computing services, the tenet addresses the unique challenges posed by diverse network assets in O-RAN architectures. This approach ensures that each component, whether locally owned or part of a broader ecosystem, is considered a valuable resource within the zero trust framework, thereby enhancing security measures tailored to the specific demands of O-RAN environments.
ZT Tenet 2 Applicability Study
Introduction
ZT Tenet 2: All Communication is secured regardless of network location.
This tenet highlights the importance of not automatically granting trust solely based on a device's presence within the enterprise network infrastructure. Access requests from assets within enterprise-owned network infrastructure, such as those inside a legacy network perimeter, must adhere to the same security requirements as requests from non-enterprise-owned networks. All communication should prioritize the most secure methods available, ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and source authentication.
Applicability study
The relevance of this tenet is particularly evident in the context of Radio Access Network (RAN) considerations for several compelling reasons. O-RAN introduces elements like disaggregation, open interfaces, and diverse deployment models, expanding the potential attack surface. Components such as the O-RAN Service Management and Orchestration (SMO), Radio Intelligent Controller (RICs), and RIC Apps within the Open RAN framework are susceptible to exploitation for confidentiality, integrity, and availability attacks from both external and internal threats [i.8]. Therefore, addressing tenet 2 is crucial within the Open RAN architecture to effectively mitigate these security vulnerabilities.
In the context of a ZT-based O-RAN architecture adhering to ZT tenet 2, all network communications should prioritize confidentiality, integrity, and source authentication. In 5G, encryption, integrity protection, authentication schemes, and security protocols are employed to secure communication among participating entities in the network.
Conclusion
In summary, this tenet holds significant importance for O-RAN by stressing the necessity of robust security standards across all communications, regardless of their network location. With O-RAN's distinctive features like disaggregation, open interfaces, and third parties' applications, tenet 2 becomes essential for preventing security issues. By prioritizing confidentiality, integrity, and source authentication in network communications, Tenet 2 stands as a fundamental element in establishing a secure O-RAN framework, offering protection against potential threats both internal and external.
ZT Tenet 3 Applicability Study
Introduction
ZT tenet 3: Access to individual enterprise resources is granted on a per-session basis.
According to ZT tenet 3 as stated in NIST SP 800-207 [i.6], each access request should be evaluated for trustworthiness before being granted. This tenet enforces the need to authenticate and authorize every subject requesting access to a protected resource and assess all permissions before granting access with the least privileges that is required to complete the task. This tenet enforces that successful authentication and authorization to one resource by a given subject will not automatically grant access to a different resource.
Applicability Study
For a zero trust based O-RAN architecture, each access request to O-RAN resources must adapt the principle of ZT tenet 3 with strong authentication, and fine-grained access control at every point of access.
In the O-RAN architecture there are multiple Points Of Access (POA) that have been considered for the applicability of ZT tenet 3 study.
User Access to SMO: User Access to internet facing SMO services and applications.
User Access to the O-Cloud Orchestration layer: User Access to VMs and containers via the O-Cloud Management Plane (EXAMPLE: Kubernetes API server).
User Access to O-Cloud Host OS Access: User Access via SSH to Host OS.
User Access to O-Cloud Hardware Infrastructure: User authentication and authorization for accessing the network storage, and compute resources.
Network Function to Network Function Access:  NF to NF communication over O-RAN defined interfaces.
User access to TNE: User Access to Transport Network Elements, such as switches, routers, or other network devices.
Device access to the network (Open FH): Device access to open fronthaul resources like O-DU, O-RU FHM, Grandmasters etc.
User Reauthentication: Ensuring that a user accessing a protected resource is the same user who initially authenticated at the start of the session.
O-RAN ALLIANCE WG11 follows the principle of ZT tenet 3 while defining security controls and measures in the "O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls Specifications" [i.2]. WG11 has specified security requirements and security controls for the following points of access - [2], [5] and [7].
-	The current access control security mechanism specified are mTLS, IPsec, OAuth2.0, IEEE 802.1X, and NACM that ensures granular access control for O-RAN fronthaul and non-fronthaul interfaces.
-	Communication between Network Functions over O-RAN defined interfaces has been secured based on the principles of zero trust.
-	Security controls and measures have been defined for the access control for certain O-RAN components like access of O-Cloud using SMO via the O2 interface and access of NFs using SMO via the O1 interface.
Access control for the following points of access is not specified currently- user access to internet facing SMO services, user access to O-Cloud orchestration layer, O-Cloud Host OS, User Access of NFs from Host/O-Cloud node of SMO or other hosts. Access control mechanisms to these need to be evaluated for defining specific security recommendations that align to the ZT tenet 3 principle. This will ensure that the identity of the subject that is requesting access to a specific O-RAN resource identity is always verified, the subject possesses the necessary rights and meets the environment specific requirements to access the requested resource.
Conclusion
Human users, services, and applications request access to specific O-RAN network components. It is essential to authenticate every subject based on its unique identity and use RBAC rules to authorize and enforce least privilege access to the requested resources. By implementing Access Control Policies based on the Principle of Least Privilege (POLP), operators can effectively prevent attackers from moving laterally within the network.
WG11 should expand on the ZT tenet 3 principle of session-based access control to encompass the user access scenarios identified in [1],[3],[4],[6]. This will allow to define additional security controls and measures for granular categorization of access policies considering Just-in-time access, Least privileges and Just enough access for each subject identity and their rights to access the destination O-RAN assets.
ZT Tenet 4 Applicability Study
Introduction
ZT tenet 4: Access to resources is determined by dynamic policy—including the observable state of client identity, application/service, and the requesting asset—and may include other behavioural and environmental attributes.
According to ZT tenet 4 as stated in NIST SP 800-207[i.6], access requests are evaluated not solely based on the outcome of subject authentication but also take into consideration the subject's previous request history, environmental factors and security posture of both the requesting subject and resource and are governed by dynamic policies.
Applicability Study
In the O-RAN architecture, human users (subjects) can generate remote access requests to O-RAN architecture elements such as SMO, O-Cloud or O-CU/O-DU/O-RU:
a) from geo-locations that may or may not be under the direct control of the network operator,
b) using devices that are not managed by the operator,
c) over public or hybrid (public/private) networks.
It is therefore essential to control access to the requested resources not just based on the identity of the user, but also based on additional attributes of the end-user such as his/her location, end-user device hygiene, past history or behavioural information (risk-profile) etc. These attributes are captured as inputs to dynamic access policies that influence authentication and authorization of the user.
For a zero-trust based O-RAN architecture, every access to O-RAN resources should adapt the principle of ZT tenet 4 that defines and enforces access policies which are continuously updated based on inputs from continual monitoring (ZT tenet 5) of the network,
O-RAN Architecture currently considers OAuth based authorization decision for several of its interfaces. These are based on static policies that define the scope of access granted to the requesting subject. OAuth does not define policies that take into account the location or security posture of the requesting client. Similarly, NACM does not define dynamic policies.
Additionally, WG11 has a requirement for DDoS protection mitigation measures for the O2 interface in SMO. There are however no requirements to use these DDoS mitigation measures to continuously update the access requests decision process or dynamic block listing.
WG11 proposes to further study and define ZT tenet 4 based access controls policies for accessing the O-RAN and Non-ORAN assets.
Define attributes for user, services, and devices that need to be continuously monitored
Define access control policies that are dynamically updated based on inputs from continuous monitoring of the above attributes
Study the Policy decision and enforcement points for defining and enforcing ZT tenet 4 access policies in the O-RAN architecture, as described in clause 3 of NIST SP 800-207 [i.6].
These attribute-based access control policies would effectively manage, monitor, limit, and revoke access to Device, Infrastructure, Application and Services [DIAS].
Conclusion
As described in clause 4.2.4.2, human users, services, and applications request access to O-RAN network components from potentially untrusted locations, using unmanaged devices and over public or hybrid networks. It is therefore essential to include these parameters while authenticating and authorizing the subjects. Dynamic policy-based infrastructure is recommended that considers these attributes for policy generation and enforcement.
This would entail defining the user, network and device attributes for defining access control policies that would apply to all interfaces in the O-RAN network, user access to all O-RAN components as described in the ZT tenet 3 study.
ZT Tenet 5 Applicability Study
Introduction
ZT tenet 5: The enterprise monitors and measures the integrity and security posture of all owned and associated assets.
NIST 800-207 [i.6] defines Tenet 5 "The enterprise monitors and measures the integrity and security posture of all owned and associated assets". Further description in NIST SP 800-207 states, this tenet majorly covers operational security and evaluation of the asset's security posture during evaluation of resource request.
Applicability Study
ZT tenet 5 allows us to design continuous diagnostics of security events, logs etc. and evaluation of access requests to O-RAN and Non-O-RAN Assets based on security posture. O-RAN WG11 Security Log Management work item relates to the principle of zero trust architecture, however, gap analysis should be conducted to ensure ZT tenet 5 compliancy. The gap analysis would ensure the coverage of all the O-RAN assets that is being added as a part of the ZTA work item. The study would also ensure that the collection of data is sufficient for ZT tenet 7 to utilize it to improve the security posture.
As part of ZT tenet 5, WG11 would cover continuous monitoring and alerting of User Authorizations, Data access, Resource Authorization (Application/workload), User/Device Interactions. It is also essential to study the integration of threat Intelligence as a part of the ZT tenet 5 study. This would entail a continuous security monitoring system that measures integrity, and security posture of all assets in the areas of access management, behavioural analytics, configuration management, software integrity checks, vulnerability scans, security anomaly detection, etc.
For a zero trust O-RAN Architecture, ZT tenet 5 plays a critical role to detect and alert of Adversarial Lateral movements.
Conclusion
WG11 should expand on the ZT tenet 5 principles that monitors the O-RAN assets to address any gaps of security monitoring and perform "Continuous and dynamic security monitoring" to maintain them in their most secure states possible for comprehensive visibility. WG11 intends to come up with recommendation, industry standard security best practices to attain the advanced zero trust maturity model.
ZT Tenet 6 Applicability Study
4.2.6.1  	Introduction
ZT tenet 6: All resource authentication and authorization are dynamic and strictly enforced before access is allowed.
According to ZT tenet 6 as stated in NIST SP 800-207 [i.6], user access to resources is continuously re-evaluated. Any changes in the security posture of either the subject or the resource trigger reauthentication and reauthorization of the access request. This tenet expands on ZT tenet 4, which pertains to access requests through dynamic policies and ZT tenet 5 of continual monitoring to re-evaluating user transactional flow and enforcing policies based on abnormal behaviour, time-based factors, and environmental considerations.
4.2.6.2	  	Applicability Study
In the O-RAN architecture, there are multiple points of access that a user may request access to. The user undergoes authentication and authorization before granting access to the resources. Although the user was authorized for accessing the resource, the user behaviour might change on account of various factors, such as:
Access over a different network
Unknown applications on the device trying to access the resource.
Hidden malware on the device trying to access the resource.
Unusual/abnormal access patterns (e.g. location, time change compared to known user patterns)
It is essential to monitor the security posture of the subject and network resources to evaluate the trust at any given point of time and trigger reauthentication and reauthorization if needed to do so. Failure to do so may result in a compromised user account or an internal threat actor that remains undetected, and may trigger reconnaissance, continued access to the protected resource, leading to a lateral movement in the network, thus causing large outages, data theft, or sabotage of the network.
As a result, the O-RAN architecture should adapt the principle of ZT tenet 6 where every access request is continuously reevaluated to determine that the trust can be maintained and established. Continuous evaluation of all values related to the authentication, inspection, and access determinations based on the subject and destination resource should be continuously assessed.
Utilizing ongoing security monitoring (ZT tenet 5) to identify change in the security posture of subject and resource -of user access for O-Cloud Platform, mTLS, IPsec, IEEE 802.1X for authentication, OAuth2.0 and NACM based authorization decision for different O-RAN interfaces. However, there are no requirements and controls for periodic evaluation of authentication and authorization based on continuous security monitoring related information (e.g. threat assessments, security posture etc.) as well as dynamic policies that trigger-reauthentication and reauthorization of subjects.
Therefore, WG11 proposes to further study and define ZT tenet 6 based access policies for accessing the O-RAN and Non-ORAN (defined) assets of an O-RAN deployment.
Gap Analysis of the current authentication and authorization security mechanisms for each O-RAN network point of access.
Define Dynamic Authentication and Authorization policies based on the continuous security monitoring related data (ZT tenet 5), user activity patterns, device hygiene, security posture of the user and the requested access resource.
Establish Automated Identity Lifecycle Management policies that allow blacklisting, considering the ZT tenet 5 threat and security posture assessment of any user and devices.
Identity and context-based logical access boundary for devices, infrastructure, application and data.
4.2.6.3	  	Conclusion
WG11 has addressed DoS prevention and preventing content-based attacks through an interface as well as logging requirements on failed/malicious access request attempts related to ZT tenet 5. However, the dynamic assessment of authentication and authorization processes to continuously reassess trust during ongoing communications, as outlined in ZT tenet 6 is applicable to O-RAN and requires further study.
This entails studying the dynamic authentication and authorization mechanisms based on continuous identity and attributes verification of an ongoing communication. The dynamic access control policies will consider the security monitoring data (ZT tenet 5) and deployment related aspects to dynamically enforce reauthentication and reauthorization of User access to O-RAN assets and revoke access if needed. This tenet allows an operator to define and control the authentication and authorization decision points for the entire O-RAN deployment, that considers continual authentication and conditional authorization to prevent any lateral movement in the O-RAN network.
ZT Tenet 7 Applicability Study
Introduction
ZT tenet 7: The enterprise collects as much information as possible about the current state of assets, network infrastructure and communications and uses it to improve its security posture.
Further description in NIST SP 800-207 [i.6] states, this tenet covers Security posture, network traffic, and access request data analysis informs policy creation and enforcement for a robust zero-trust architecture.
Applicability Study
In the O-RAN architecture, security monitoring and security log and event management is crucial for maintaining a secure and robust security posture of all O-RAN components. Log analysis, including anomalous user behaviour, unusual network traffic patterns, and unauthorized access attempts, can facilitate the detection and mitigation of lateral movement as observed in [i.11].
With the ZT tenet 5 we have a Proactive approach. It focuses on setting up logging of security events to reduce potential damage from the beginning. With the ZT tenet 7 we have a Reactive approach. It involves constantly monitoring for suspicious activity after access is granted and it focuses on detecting and responding to unauthorized or unusual activity.
WG11 has specified Security Log Management requirements and controls but has not defined procedures to leverage data collection to improve asset security posture by identifying vulnerabilities, monitoring access patterns, and access request decisions based on contextual insights and behavioural analytics.
It is essential to study the logging and monitoring infrastructure to understand the type of data collected, use data analytics mechanisms to understand the security posture of O-RAN and Non-O-RAN assets. This will be an enabler to build an infrastructure to enforce dynamic security policies thus improving security posture for O-RAN assets and Non-O-RAN assets. Based on contextual insights and behavioural analytics policy enforcement can be in the area of user access to O-RAN and Non O-RAN component, service to service communication, mitigation of adversarial lateral movements, mitigation of DDOS attacks against any interface, isolation of any NF due to abnormal behaviour etc.
For a zero trust O-RAN Architecture, ZT tenet 7 plays a critical role.
Conclusion
WG11 should expand on the ZT tenet 7 principles that allow us to collect as much information as possible about the current state of assets, network infrastructure and communications and uses it to improve its security posture. This enables an operator to detect anomalous behaviour, identify potential security threats, and take timely mitigation actions as referenced in [i.10] tenet 7 evaluation. WG11 intends to come up with recommendation, industry standard security best practices to attain the advanced zero trust maturity model.
NIST ZT Tenets applicability summary
All seven ZT tenets are applicable to O-RAN, with varying levels of specification in O-RAN ALLIANCE specifications. Full realization for some tenets may require integration with systems outside the scope of O-RAN, which will be left to the operator. The role of the O-RAN ALLIANCE in these cases should be to produce security requirements, controls and specifications that support these tenets. Table 4.3-1 provides a summary with justification of the NIST ZT tenet applicability study for O-RAN.
Table -: NIST ZT Tenet Applicability Summary
ZTA Assets
Asset Categories
Traditional perimeter-based network defenses with multiple layers of disjointed security technologies have proven themselves unable to meet cybersecurity needs in the current threat environment [i.13]. Organizations require a more effective approach to securing their infrastructure and providing unified yet granular access control to data, services, applications, and infrastructure [i.13]. Zero Trust focuses on protecting critical data and resources rather than solely relying on traditional network or perimeter security. ZT implements continuous multi-factor authentication, micro-segmentation, encryption, endpoint security, automation, analytics, and robust auditing across different resources [i.14]. Zero Trust Architecture treats each asset as a micro-perimeter to protect against both internal and external threats [i.8]. To mitigate cyber risk effectively, ZT planners should define the organization's protect surface, which the NSTAC report defines as the area protected by ZT policies [i.15].
In the following, we describe five categories of assets that need to be considered for ZTA analysis. It is important to note that some categories include two types of assets: O-RAN assets and assets that are not specified by O-RAN ALLIANCE. While the later are outside the scope of O-RAN specification, we include them to highlight the importance of considering them for analysis for a holistic ZTA for O-RAN system.
Data: O-RAN data encompasses both structured and unstructured files and fragments that are currently or have previously been present in O-RAN systems, devices, networks, applications, databases, infrastructure, and backups (including both on-premises and virtual environments), along with their corresponding metadata.
Interfaces:
O-RAN Interfaces: Interfaces defined and maintained by O-RAN, as specified in [i.1].
Interfaces not specified by O-RAN: This includes interfaces defined and maintained by 3GPP, but seen as part of the O-RAN architecture [i.1]:
Architecture Elements:  This asset category comprises the architecture elements as defined in [i.1].
Infrastructure: The infrastructure category within O-RAN assets encompasses a wide array of components, including both physical and virtual elements, as well as various platforms. It includes:
O-RAN infrastructure assets:
Hardware: This comprises servers, data centers, and other networking equipment that form the physical foundation of the O-RAN infrastructure. This includes FHGW (Fronthaul Gateway), FHM (Fronthaul Manager), and TNE (Transport Network Element).
Operating System and Firmware: These are essential software components that provide the foundational functionality for the hardware components, enabling them to operate efficiently and effectively. This includes OS kernel, Bootloader, O-Cloud DMS, and O-Cloud IMS.
Virtualization Layer: This refers to the software layer that enables the virtualization of hardware resources, allowing for the creation and management of virtual instances of servers, networking equipment, and other infrastructure components. This layer includes components like virtual machines (VMs), containers, and hypervisors.
Infrastructure assets not specified by O-RAN: These components are essential for managing and facilitating communication between various O-RAN network elements. This includes GM, which is a component within the O-RAN architecture but not defined by O-RAN ALLIANCE.
Services: A service is a software component participating in a service-oriented architecture that provides functionality or participates in realizing one or more capabilities [i.20].
O-RAN services: This includes O-RAN services that operate in both on-premises and cloud environments, such as AI/ML workflow services [i.21], O-Cloud O2ims and O2dms services.
Services not specified by O-RAN: It encompasses third-party services providing various functionalities for O-RAN applications, including security services like PKI, IAM, and SIEM.
Defined Assets
The high-level scope of the assets in scope for the ZTA analysis is outlined in Table 5.2-1.
Table -: High Level ZTA Assets for O-RAN
NOTE:	In O-RAN, O-Cloud is considered an architecture element; however for the purposes of the ZTA security analysis, it is considered as infrastructure.
The detailed list of assets in scope for the ZTA analysis is in clause 6.3 Critical Assets of [i.4] which lists the O-RAN data, interfaces and components that were used to perform security threat modelling and risk assessment and have formed the basis of the development of security requirements and controls within the various security work items.
The following clauses identify new assets in the decoupled SMO, O-Cloud and the Open Fronthaul that have not yet been incorporated into clause 6.3 of [i.4].
New Assets
New Assets in the SMO
Table -: SMO Assets
O-Cloud Assets
The table below lists assets associated with O-Cloud, incorporating existing assets from the Threat Model [i.4] and expanding them with new assets based on the ZTA approach.
Table -: O-Cloud Assets
New Assets in the Open Fronthaul
Table -: Open Fronthaul Assets
New Assets in F1 (Midhaul)
Table -: F1 Assets
Reference ZTA Security Requirements
ZTA Framework
Introduction
There are several frameworks or roadmaps developed by US government agencies that provide organizations at the start of their ZT journey with a reference for charting their transition towards a ZTA. This clause gives an overview and comparison of the CISA Zero Trust Maturity Model and the DoD Zero Trust Strategy and Reference Architecture, and provides the selection of the ZTA framework for O-RAN evaluation.
CISA's Zero Trust Maturity Model (ZTMM)
The US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) developed the Zero Trust Maturity Model (ZTMM) [i.9]. ZTMM offers a systematic approach for organizations seeking to sustain ongoing modernization initiatives in the dynamic realms of cybersecurity and technology. It serves as a guide for organizations in crafting and executing their transition plans towards Zero Trust Architectures. CISA's Maturity Model (MM) outlines a phased and incremental approach for the effective implementation of a ZTA across four stages: Traditional, Initial, Advanced, and Optimal, as illustrated in Figure 6.1-1. Emphasizing a comprehensive perspective, the model introduces five critical pillars for Zero Trust: Identity, Devices, Networks, Applications & Workloads, and Data. Each pillar is supported by distinct Pillar-specific Functions, delineating specific requirements that should be maintained across the four stages. For instance, under the Identity pillar, functions are specified with requirements tailored to each stage. Additionally, the model incorporates Cross-cutting Functions, which traverse all pillars and can evolve throughout the four stages. These cross-cutting functions encompass Visibility and Analytics, Automation and Orchestration, and Governance. The overarching concept is for agencies to assess their current enterprise stage, establish a target stage, conduct a meticulous gap analysis, and formulate a strategic plan accordingly. This structured approach ensures a methodical progression towards optimal Zero Trust implementation, tailored to the specific needs and requirements of each organization.
Figure -: CISA Zero Trust Maturity Model
DoD Zero Trust Strategy and Reference Architecture
The United States Department of Defense (DoD) Zero Trust Strategy [i.18] and Reference Architecture [i.14] collectively form a comprehensive framework guiding the implementation of zero trust principles. The Reference Architecture (RA) serves as a foundational element, presenting a capability-centric framework structured around architectural Pillars and Principles. This framework provides essential guidance for the strategic development of zero trust concepts, offering a systematic approach to conduct gap analyses, formulate requirements, oversee implementation, guide execution decision-making, and facilitate the procurement and deployment of necessary zero trust capabilities and activities. Simultaneously, the DoD Zero Trust Strategy serves as a crucial companion, furnishing actionable guidance that spans the entire spectrum of zero trust initiatives. The strategy encompasses a holistic approach, aligning seamlessly with the Reference Architecture to fortify the DoD's cybersecurity posture in a rapidly evolving threat landscape.
The ZT Pillars in the DoD ZT Architecture align seamlessly with industry-standard identification of ZT Pillars. As illustrated in Figure 6.1-2, the seven Pillars within the DoD ZT Architecture include: User, Devices, Network, Applications/Workload, Data, Visibility/Analytics, and Automation/Orchestration. Each Pillar serves as a key focus area for the implementation of specific zero trust controls, ensuring a holistic and effective security approach.
Each pillar consists of multiple capabilities. Capabilities mean the ability to achieve a specific goal using different methods and resources. These capabilities use current technologies in zero trust and may change in the future. The Pillars and capabilities work together to give the best visibility and protection to data. Moreover, the DoD proposed the DoD ZT Capability roadmap that describes how the Department currently envisions achieving the capability-based outcomes and activities sequenced over time to achieve the DoD Zero Trust Target Level and Advanced Zero Trust [i.18, i.19].
The DoD framework also includes a Maturity Model that outlines the logical progression from an existing security model to an advanced zero trust architecture. This Maturity Model serves as a reference to assist information system owners in conceptualizing their transition from their current state to their desired architecture. The stages of the Maturity Model begin with As-Is state and progress through Baseline and Intermediate to Advanced stages, reflecting the evolution of zero trust capabilities and controls [i.14].
It is also important to note that the DoD Zero Trust Target Level encompasses a defined subset of DoD Zero Trust capabilities. This level includes both Baseline and Intermediate zero trust maturity stages, as outlined by the Zero Trust Reference Architecture (ZT RA). The DoD Advanced Zero Trust, on the other hand, represents the achievement of the full set of DoD-identified zero trust capabilities and aligns with the Advanced maturity stage [i.14, i.18].
Figure -: DoD ZT Capabilities
Comparison of ZTMM models
CISA ZTMM [i.9] and DoD ZTMM [i.14] complement NIST's ZTA by offering a roadmap for organizations to assess their current maturity level and provide guidance on steps to incrementally progress to higher maturity stages. The CISA and DoD ZTMMs mostly align with some differences, as described below.
The four CISA ZTMM stages - Traditional, Initial, Advanced, and Optimal - are achieved for each of five pillars: Identity, Devices, Networks, Applications and Workloads, and Data. The CISA ZTMM also includes three cross-cutting functions across the five pillars: Visibility and Analytics, Automation and Orchestration, and Governance. These cross-cutting functions align with NIST tenets 4, 5, and 7 mentioned above.
The four DoD ZTMM stages – As-is, Baseline, Intermediate, and Advanced - are achieved for each of seven pillars: User, Device, Networks, Applications and Workloads, Data, Visibility and Analytics, and Automation and Orchestration.  The last two pillars in the DoD ZTMM model are considered cross-cutting functions by CISA.
A diagram overlaying the CISA and DoD ZTMM models is shown in Figure 6.1-3.
Figure 6.1-3: Comparison of US CISA and DoD ZTMM
Selection of CISA ZTMM Model
The CISA ZTMM version 2 [i.9] has been selected as the primary reference model for two reasons:
CISA embeds its cross-cutting functions across its five pillars, instead of making those standalone pillars as the DoD ZTMM does. The CISA approach is preferred for O-RAN since Visibility and Analytics and Automation and Orchestration are applicable to all pillars and should not be silo'd.
CISA does not prescribe a timeline to reach its final stage, Optimal.  While the DoD provides guidelines for implementation timelines, these are applicable to DoD use cases, which are outside the scope of O-RAN ALLIANCE.
Target ZTA Security Requirements
Introduction
CISA's ZTMM offers four stages of zero trust journey with incremental approach to achieve ZTA for the five identified pillars - Identity, Devices, Networks, Applications and Workloads, and Data as well as the three cross cutting pillars - Visibility and Analytics, Automation and Orchestration, and Governance that encompass the five pillars. Each pillar has specific functions that progresses on the incremental journey to achieve ZTA.
In this clause, we specify the O-RAN ZTA security requirements across the five pillars to identify gaps between O-RAN's current security requirements and those outlined in the CISA-aligned O-RAN ZTA security requirements. This assessment will help evaluate O-RAN's current zero trust maturity stage and, based on the gap analysis, define new security requirements and controls if needed.
NOTE:	The cross-cutting pillars Visibility and Analytics, Automation and Orchestration, and Governance will be included in a separate clause for specifying recommendations and requirements as needed.
Each sub-clause of this clause is dedicated to a CISA ZTMM pillar and the "Guidance for Gap Analysis" of each function of a pillar provides information that can aid in gap analysis.
The gap analysis is being performed against the INITIAL stage of CISA ZTMM security requirements.
Identity
Introduction
In O-RAN identity encompasses three entities namely users, devices, and software applications. The identity plays an important role to provide a unique attribute to the entity which is used to authenticate and authorize an entity.
The Identity Pillar has the following pillar specific functions defined in CISA ZTMM:
Authentication - Verification of users, devices, and software applications identities.
Access Management - Authorization ensures what resources and data an authenticated entity (user, device, or application) can access.
Identity Stores - Identity Stores are repositories where identity information is stored, managed, and accessed.
Risk Assessments - Continuously evaluating and mitigating identity-related risks through adaptive policies and real-time monitoring.
Authentication
Introduction
Authentication function applies to the following three entities - users, devices, and software applications.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Authentication
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
Additional attributes (contextual attributes) apply only to human user and external communication, and applicable to Architecture Elements having user access such as SMO.
Phishing resistant MFA security control applies to human user access and not applicable to application-to-application access and device authentication.
If there is mutual authentication for internal communications, we consider the stage as INITIAL.
For internal interfaces, authentication based on credentials alone (certificate, pre-shared key, etc.) can be considered as meeting INITIAL maturity level.
Access Management (Authorization)
Introduction
Authorization ensures what resources and data an authenticated entity (user, device, or application) is allowed to access and what actions they are permitted to perform within a O-RAN network or system.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Access Management (Authorization)
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
This function applies to APIs and user access.
For applications, static role assignments (e.g. role binding of a service account) with ephemeral tokens can be considered as INITIAL stage.
For users, tokens with expiry can be considered as INITIAL stage.
Identity Stores
Introduction
Identity Stores are repositories where identity information is stored, managed, and accessed. They are crucial for managing access, authentication, and authorization. In O-RAN, addressing Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) requirements necessitates capturing, storing, and managing the identities of various actors—including administrators, applications, services, and devices—and their associated credentials and attributes. This is accomplished through the identity stores function within the identity pillar.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Identity Stores
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
None as this is a new function.
WG11 to provide recommendation for Identity Stores.
Risk Assessment
Introduction
Conducting Identity Risk Assessments for users, devices, and software application entities is crucial for advancing towards a Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA). Many other CISA ZTMM functions in other pillars depend on the risk assessment function in the identity pillar. This includes Network Traffic Management in the networks pillar, application access in the applications and workloads pillar, and data access in the data pillar.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Risk Assessment
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
None as this is a new function.
WG11 to provide recommendation for Identity Risk Assessments.
Devices
Introduction
The Devices pillar includes the O-RAN network elements that fall under the infrastructure asset category. It includes Physical devices as well as virtual and cloud hardware. The pillar specific functions are as following:
Policy Enforcement & Compliance Monitoring- Visibility of all devices and compliance and unified management and enforcement of policies.
Asset & Supply Chain Risk Management- Asset management tracks all physical, virtual, and cloud devices, using automated supply chain risk management to ensure comprehensive visibility and resilience against supply chain failures.
Resource Access- Secure and controlled access to resources based on device characteristics, risk analytics data.
Device Threat Protection- Implement security measures to detect, prevent, and respond to threats targeting devices.
The potential O-RAN relevant zero trust functions for gap analysis study are Policy Enforcement and Compliance Monitoring, Resource Access, and Device Threat Protection.
The Asset & Supply Chain Risk Management function is for further study.
Policy enforcement & Compliance monitoring
Introduction
Manage dynamic inventory of all assets including their hardware, software, firmware, etc., along with their configurations and known associated vulnerabilities. Define device compliance policies and policy enforcement for all assets.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Policy enforcement and compliance monitoring
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
Please refer to the table in clause 6.2.3.2.2 for different stages of this function, since there is no specific guidance.
Resource Access (Authorization)
Introduction
The access to resources is allowed only for secured devices.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Resource Access
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
Use device characteristics or virtual asset characteristics (e.g. Access Control Rules (policy), environmental conditions) to approve resource access to align to the INITIAL stage.
Device Threat Protection
Introduction
The devices are deployed with threat protection solutions to detect, prevent, respond, and recover from threats.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Device Threat Protection
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
The guidance for gap analysis of 'Device Threat Protection' function is for further study.
Networks
Introduction
In O-RAN, the network pillar of CISA ZTMM encompasses internal, external interfaces of Architecture elements as well as infrastructure assets. The network pillar specific functions are as following.
Network Segmentation - Dividing the network into smaller, isolated segments to enhance security based on application profiles and risk
Network Traffic Management - Define network rules and configuration based on application profile assessment.
Traffic Encryption - All data transmitted across the network is encrypted to protect confidentiality and integrity, using robust key management and adaptive encryption strategies.
Network Resilience - Continuous availability and resilience for all workloads.
The O-RAN relevant zero trust functions for gap analysis study are Network Segmentation, Traffic Encryption and Network Traffic Management.
The Network Resilience function is for future study.
Network Segmentation
Introduction
The O-RAN Network functions are secured with micro-perimeters and all interfaces associated with it are secured.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Network Segmentation
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
Perimeter based security protection like VPN tunnel access is considered as Traditional.
Micro segmentation for critical workloads using namespaces, VLANs is considered as INITIAL .
NOTE:	Definition of micro-perimeter in the scope of O-RAN ALLIANCE is yet to be specified.
Traffic Encryption
Introduction
Encryption of traffic through internal and external interfaces with secure key management.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Traffic Encryption
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
Symmetric key based encryption methods, such as IPsec for E2, can be classified as being in the INITIAL stage.
Certificate lifecycle management will upgrade the maturity to Advanced.
Network Traffic Management
Introduction
Network Traffic Management involves implementing static and dynamic network rules for ingress and egress traffic, which are automatically adapted based on risk and application needs.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Network Traffic Management
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
Support for ingress and egress policies align with the INITIAL stage.
NOTE:	The support for ingress and egress policies is provided by the O-RAN Specifications. But the decision to provision the rules and policies is left to the operator.
Applications and Workloads
Introduction
Applications and workloads include systems, computer programs, and services that execute on-premises, on mobile devices, and in cloud environments [i.9]. In O-RAN, this pillar corresponds to the following asset categories: architecture elements, interfaces, and services. These asset categories are described in clause 5. The application and workloads pillar specific functions are as following:
Application Access - This function outlines the requirements that must be met by the access control mechanism to authorize access to various applications within the system.
Application Threat Protections – This function describes how to incorporate threat protections into the workflows of applications.
Accessible Applications – This function describes how various applications within the system should be made available and accessible.
Secure Application Development and Deployment Workflow – This function details the requirements for secure development and deployment workflows for various applications within the system.
Application Security Testing – This function specifies the requirements for testing the security of applications.
The O-RAN relevant zero trust functions for gap analysis study are Application Access, Application Threat Protections, Accessible Applications, Secure Application Developments and Deployment Workflow, and Application Security Testing.
Application Access
Introduction
Application Access, also known as Access Authorization, is critical for limiting access to application assets only to authorized entities and removing access when no longer needed. It evolves through four distinct stages of sophistication, reflecting the maturity in managing application access.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Application Access
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Access authorization capabilities utilize contextual information such as identity, device compliance, and other attributes to make decisions on various requests for accessing application assets.
Authorization is granted per request with expiration.
Application Threat Protections
Introduction
As reliance on applications grows, so does the risk of cyber threats targeting these critical assets. To counteract these risks effectively, O-RAN should implement Application Threat Protection capabilities.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Application Threat Protections
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Threat protection is integrated into mission-critical application workflows.
Threat protections safeguard applications against known threats and address some application-specific threats.
Accessible Applications
Introduction
Accessibility to applications is paramount for organizational efficiency and productivity.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Application Accessibility
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Applicable mission-critical applications are available over open public network connections to authorized users as needed.
Secure Application Development and Deployment Workflow
Introduction
The Secure Application Development and Deployment Workflow is crucial for O-RAN as it ensures the integrity and security of applications across diverse and distributed network components.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Secure Application Development
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Infrastructure for development, testing, and production environments (including automation).
Formal code deployment mechanisms through CI/CD pipelines.
Access controls support least privilege principles.
Application Security Testing
Introduction
Application security testing is crucial for identifying and mitigating vulnerabilities early, reducing the risk of security breaches. This proactive approach ensures the consistent protection of applications, safeguarding sensitive data and maintaining the integrity of the O-RAN system.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Application Security Testing
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Utilization of static and dynamic testing methods for security testing.
Performance of security testing including manual expert analysis before application deployment.
Data
Introduction
In O-RAN, data encompasses both structured and unstructured files and fragments that are currently or have previously been present in O-RAN systems, devices, networks, applications, databases, infrastructure, and backups (including both on-premises and virtual environments), along with their corresponding metadata.
Data Inventory Management – This function describes how the system inventories its data.
Data Categorization – This function outlines how data should be categorized within the system.
Data Availability – This function specifies how various data within the system should be made available.
Data Access - This function outlines the requirements that must be met by the access control mechanism to authorize access to various data within the system.
Data Encryption – This function specifies requirements for encrypting data within the system.
The potential O-RAN relevant zero trust functions for gap analysis study are Data Inventory Management, Data Categorization, Data Availability¸ Data Access, and Data Encryption.
Data Inventory Management
Introduction
A data inventory is a comprehensive catalogue that identifies and inventories all available data within the O-RAN system. It should detect and incorporate any changes to the data landscape. This inventory includes metadata about the data, providing a detailed reference that aids in understanding and managing the organization's data assets effectively.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Inventory Management
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Automated data inventory processes for both on-premises and in cloud environments, which covers most system data.
Protections against data loss are beginning to be incorporated.
Data Categorization
Introduction
Establishing granular data categorization integrated into access control systems consistently and correctly is required for machine enforceable data access controls, risk assessment, and situational awareness. As data categorization and labelling practices mature, labelling should become automated to meet scaling demands and provide better labelling accuracy.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Categorization
Guidance for Gap Analysis
A data categorization strategy with defined labels and manual enforcement mechanisms.
Data Availability
Introduction
Data Availability refers to the ability of an organization to ensure that its data is accessible when needed, both in terms of current and historical data. This function progresses through various stages of sophistication and reliability, marked by increasing redundancy, optimization, and user-centric access methods.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Availability
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Data stored in redundant mode (e.g., cloud).
Data maintained in off-site backups for on premises data.
Data Access
Introduction
Data access control aims to restrict access to and usage of data based on properties and attributes associated with the data, the user/device, along with any other relevant information. This ensures that unauthorized entities or entities using unauthorized devices cannot access the data. Additionally, it ensures that users and devices with access to the data undergo continuous attribute inspection through various policy decisions and enforcement points within the architecture. This function progresses through several stages, evolving from static access control to dynamic, just-in-time, and just-enough data access controls.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Access
Guidance for Gap Analysis:
Automated data access control.
Elements of least privileges are incorporated with the automated data access control.
Data Encryption
Introduction
Data encryption is crucial for protecting data against unauthorized access, modification, or redistribution. Encrypting data ensures that organizations can protect their data even if it is exfiltrated or lost, as long as the decryption keys remain secure and out of the hands of malicious actors.
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Encryption
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Encrypted data in transit and, where feasible, data at rest.
Key management policies and secure encryption keys are beginning to be formalized.
Cross-Cutting Capabilities
Introduction
The cross-cutting capabilities Visibility and Analytics, Automation and Orchestration, and Governance provide opportunities to integrate advancements across each of the five pillars. Visibility and Analytics supports comprehensive visibility that informs policy decisions and facilitates response activities. Automation and Orchestration capabilities leverage these insights to support robust and streamlined operations to handle security incidents and respond to events as they arise. Governance enables agencies to manage and monitor their regulatory, legal, environmental, federal, and operational requirements in support of risk-based decision making. Governance capabilities also ensure the right people, process, and technology are in place to support mission, risk, and compliance objectives [i.9]. CISA ZTMM recommends that these capabilities mature both in relation to each specific pillar and independently of the pillars. This clause outlines the O-RAN target security requirements for the CISA ZTMM cross-cutting capabilities. It begins by presenting the general O-RAN ZTA security requirements for visibility and analytics, and then details these requirements across the various pillars. The governance capability is considered out of scope, as it pertains to defining and enforcing policies, which falls under operational scope.
High level maturity evolution for Cross-Cutting Capabilities
Visibility and Analytics
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Visibility and Analytics Cross-cutting Capability
Guidance for Gap Analysis
The automation of the collection and analysis of logs and events for mission-critical functions is initiated.
Processes are regularly assessed for gaps in visibility.
Automation and Orchestration
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Automation and Orchestration Cross-cutting Capability
Guidance for Gap Analysis
The automation of orchestration and response activities in support of critical mission functions is initiated.
Identity Cross-Cutting Capabilities
Visibility and Analytics
Collecting and analyzing user and entity logs is crucial for maintaining network security and identifying potential threats. User and entity behaviour analytics (UEBA) leverages this log data to detect abnormal behaviours, which are often indicative of security incidents. By correlating information across multiple log sources, UEBA can identify unusual patterns that single or limited log sources might miss. This comprehensive analysis is essential because cyber actors frequently attempt to blend in with regular network activities, making it challenging to spot their malicious actions. Through thorough log collection and analysis, organizations can enhance their ability to detect, investigate, and respond to security threats effectively [i.22].
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Visibility and Analytics in the Identity Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Collecting user and entity activity logs.
Performing Routine Analysis:
Conduct regular manual analysis of the logs.
Implement some automated analysis, with limited correlation between different log types.
Automation and Orchestration
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Automation and Orchestration in the Identity Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Manually orchestrates privileged and external identities.
Automates orchestration of non-privileged users.
Automates orchestration of self-managed entities.
Devices Cross-Cutting Capabilities
Visibility and Analytics
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Visibility and Analytics in the Devices Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Digital Identifiers: Use digital identifiers alongside a manual inventory and endpoint monitoring of devices when available.
Automated Analysis: Ensure some devices and virtual assets are under automated analysis (e.g., software-based scanning) for anomaly detection based on risk.
Automation and Orchestration
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Automation and Orchestration in the Devices Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Utilization of monitoring and enforcement mechanisms to identify and manually disconnect or isolate non-compliant devices and virtual assets.
Networks Cross-Cutting Capabilities
Visibility and Analytics
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Visibility and Analytics in the Networks Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Utilize network monitoring capabilities based on known indicators of compromise, including network enumeration, to develop situational awareness in each environment.
Commence correlating telemetry across traffic types and environments to facilitate analysis and threat hunting activities.
Automation and Orchestration
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Automation and Orchestration in the Networks Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Initiate the use of automated methods to manage the configuration and lifecycle of resources within specific networks or environments.
Ensure that all resources have a defined lifetime determined by policies and telemetry data.
Applications & Workloads Capabilities
Visibility and Analytics
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Visibility and Analytics in the Applications & Workloads Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Initiate the automation of application profile and security monitoring processes for improved log collection, aggregation, and analytics.
Automation and Orchestration
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Automation and Orchestration in the Applications & Workloads Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Periodically modifies application configurations, including location and access parameters, to align with pertinent security and performance objectives.
Data Cross-Cutting Capabilities
Visibility and Analytics
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Visibility and Analytics in the Data Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Utilizes data inventory management, data categorization, data encryption, and access attempts information with some automated analysis and correlation to obtain visibility.
Automation and Orchestration
O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Automation and Orchestration in the Data Pillar
Guidance for Gap Analysis
Data lifecycle and security policies are automated.
Alignment to Target ZTA Requirements
Introduction
This clause first reviews the current status of O-RAN security specifications and then evaluates this against the reference ZTA security requirements in clause 6.2.
Current O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls
Table 7.2-1 is a snapshot of the interface security controls enforcing authenticity, confidentiality, integrity, authorization, data origination, and replay prevention. The protocols listed in Table 7.2-1 are mandatory for the vendor to support and optional for the operator to use, as regional regulatory requirements may differ. The only exception is 802.1X which is optional for the vendor to support as well as optional for the operator to use. Detailed requirements can be found in [i.2] and [i.3].
Table -: Mandatory O-RAN interface security controls (See NOTE for 802.1X1 and PDCP2)
NOTE 1:	802.1X provides authentication of the device plugging into a network port and controls access to send/receive network traffic. 802.1X does not provide authenticity of the data flowing across the C-plane, U-plane, S-plane, and M-plane interfaces between the O-DU and O-RU.
NOTE 2:	3GPP Access Stratum (AS) Control Plane and User Plane messages that are transported via the Open Fronthaul U-Plane (LLS-UP) are confidentiality and integrity protected by the Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) [i.16]. PDCP security controls remain in place when the message traverses the Open Fronthaul U-Plane. PDCP requirements are specified by the 3GPP in TS 33.501 [i.17]. PDCP does not provide confidentiality and integrity protection for plain text messages flowing across the U-plane interface between the O-DU and O-RU.
The controls still under development are authorization for the E2 interface as well as confidentiality, integrity, data origination and replay prevention on the C-, U-, and S-plane. Authorization for the E2 interface is being developed in collaboration with the Near-Real Time RIC and E2 interface work group. Confidentiality and integrity protection on the Open Fronthaul C- and U-Planes and authenticity protection on the Open Fronthaul S-Plane are being developed in collaboration with the Open Fronthaul and Transport working groups.
Table 7.2-2 is an overview of the mandatory O-RAN transversal requirements that support ZT tenets such as security posture, data collection, and monitoring.
Table 7.2-2: O-RAN Cross-Platform Security Requirements
Gap Analysis
Gap Analysis Methodology
Gap Analysis Workflow
The gap analysis guidelines for addressing the Initial stage for each pillar in the CISA ZTMM within O-RAN were derived in clause 6.2. Figure 7.3-1 outlines the high-level workflow for performing the gap analysis. The workflow is divided into two paths: one for the defined assets described in clause 5.2 [i.4] and the other for new assets identified during the ZTA WI study as described in clause 5.3.
Asset Mapping: First, list the various types of assets for each O-RAN element, and then map the assets to the corresponding CISA ZTMM Pillar.
Comparison: Compare the current security requirements and controls of the assets to the corresponding ZT pillar’s INITIAL Maturity Level security guidelines, as derived in clause 6.2.
Gap Identification: Document the gap analysis and forward the identified gaps to relevant work items (e.g., Near-RT RIC, Open Fronthaul, O-Cloud, SMO).
Work Item Analysis: Each work item performs threat analysis, determines new security requirements and controls to achieve the INITIAL ZTA Maturity Level and updates the Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment Technical Report [i.4] and Security Requirements and Controls Specifications [i.2]
Figure 7.3-1 Gap Analysis Workflow
Mapping of O-RAN Assets to CISA ZTMM Pillars
In the gap analysis process, each asset is mapped to a pillar or a set of pillars in CISA ZTMM. For reference, asset categories are defined in clause 5.1. Table 7.3-1 illustrates this mapping process.
Table - Mapping of O-RAN Assets and Other Components to Different Pillars
NOTE: APIs, as defined by O-RAN, should be tested against both CISA’s Networks Pillar and Applications Pillar.
Transversal Functions
This clause will be updated in a later version.
xApp and Near-RT RIC Gap Analysis
xApp and Near-RT RIC Data Pillar Analysis
xApp Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-D-15: Application software package
ASSET-D-23: Patches for vulnerable SW components
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files.
ASSET-D-31: Security telemetry from the NFV system for detecting threats and anomalies.
Cryptographic Data:
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot
AI/ML Data:
ASSET-D-25: Training or test data
ASSET-D-26: The trained ML model
ASSET-D-27: The ML prediction results built into the model
ASSET-D-28: The behavior of the ML system
Near-RT RIC Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
ASSET-D-39: xApp ID
ASSET-D-10: Database holding data from xApp applications and E2 Node
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates
ASSET-D-17: Private Keys
ASSET-D-23: Patches for vulnerable SW components.
ASSET-D-25: Training or test data
ASSET-D-26: The trained ML model
ASSET-D-27: The ML prediction results built into the model
ASSET-D-28: The behavior of the ML system
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files.
ASSET-D-31: Security telemetry from the NFV system for detecting threats and anomalies
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot
ASSET-D-07: A1 policies that are provided to the near-RT RIC over the A1 interface
ASSET-D-08: A1 Enrichment Information
ASSET-D-30: O-RAN specific several UE IDs
ASSET-D-20: Credentials (Administrators)
Data Pillar Transversal Functions
The following Data Pillar functions are considered transversal and are covered in 7.3.2:
Data inventory management
Data categorization
Data availability
xApp and Near-RT RIC Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: xApp and Near-RT RIC Data Pillar Gap Analysis
xApp and Near-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Analysis
xApp Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
ASSET-C-09: xApps. This includes xApps services.
Near-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
ASSET-C-13: A1 termination. This includes A1 related services.
ASSET-C-41: E2 functions. This includes E2 related services.
ASSET-C-43: Y1 Functions. This includes Y1 related services.
Other Services of the Near-RT RIC platform: this includes Management related services, SDL services, Enablement services, and AI/ML workflow services [i.23].
Application and Workloads Pillar Transversal Functions
No transversal functions applicable
xApp and Near-RT RIC Application and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: xApp and Near-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
xApp and Near-RT RIC Identity Pillar Analysis
xApp Identity Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
ASSET-C-09: xApps.
Near-RT RIC Identity Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
ASSET-C-02: Near-RT RIC software.
Identity Pillar Transversal Functions
The following identity pillar functions are considered transversal and are covered in 7.3.2:
Identity stores.
Risk assessments.
Access management.
xApp and Near-RT RIC Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: xApp and Near-RT RIC Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
xApp and Near-RT RIC Networks Pillar Analysis
xApp Networks Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Near-RT RIC Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
Near-RT RIC APIs.
Networks Pillar Transversal Functions
The following Network pillars functions are considered transversal and are covered in 7.3.2:
Network Segmentation.
Network Traffic Management.
Network resilience.
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: xApp and Near-RT RIC Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
xApp and Near-RT RIC Devices Pillar Analysis
xApp Devices Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Near-RT RIC Devices Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Devices Pillar Transversal Functions
The following devices pillar functions are considered transversal and are covered in 7.3.2:
Policy Enforcement and Compliance Monitoring.
Asset & Supply Chain Risk Management.
Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
The Devices Pillar is out of scope for the gap analysis.
E2 Interface Gap Analysis
E2 Interface Data Pillar Analysis
E2 Interface Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-D-09: Data transported over the E2 Interface
ASSET-D-30: O-RAN specific several UE IDs.
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates.
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-25: Training or test data
E2 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: E2 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
E2 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Analysis
E2 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
E2 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis applies since there are no assets applicable to specific pillar
E2 Interface Identity Pillar Analysis
E2 Interface Identity Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
E2 Interface Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis applies since there are no assets applicable to specific pillar
E2 Interface Networks Pillar Analysis
E2 Interface Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
ASSET-C-40: E2 interface, including protocol stack
E2 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: E2 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
E2 Interface Devices Pillar Analysis
E2 Interface Devices Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
E2 Interface Devices Pillar Transversal Functions
The following devices pillar functions are considered transversal and are covered in 7.3.2:
Policy Enforcement and Compliance Monitoring.
Asset & Supply Chain Risk Management.
E2 Interface Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
The Devices Pillar is out of scope for the gap analysis.
Y1 Interface Gap Analysis
Y1 Interface Data Pillar Analysis
Y1 Interface Data Pillar Assets
Data transported over the Y1 interface
Y1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: Y1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Y1 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Analysis
Y1 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Y1 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis applies since there are no assets applicable to specific pillar
Y1 Interface Identity Pillar Analysis
Y1 Interface Identity Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Y1 Interface Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis applies since there are no assets applicable to specific pillar
Y1 Interface Networks Pillar Analysis
Y1 Interface Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment  [i.4] and the WG3 Near-RT RIC Architecture [i.23] are as follows:
ASSET-C-42: Y1 interface, including protocol stack
Y1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: Y1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Y1 Interface Devices Pillar Analysis
Y1 Interface Devices Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Y1 Interface Devices Pillar Transversal Functions
The following devices pillar functions are considered transversal and are covered in 7.3.2:
Policy Enforcement and Compliance Monitoring.
Asset & Supply Chain Risk Management.
Y1 Interface Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
The Devices Pillar is out of scope for the gap analysis.
rApp and Non-RT RIC Gap Analysis
rApp and Non-RT RIC Data Pillar Analysis
rApp Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates.
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN components associated and configuration data.
ASSET-D-20: Credentials (Administrators).
ASSET-D-23: Patches for vulnerable SW components.
ASSET-D-25: Training or test data
ASSET-D-26: The trained ML model
ASSET-D-27: The ML prediction results built into the model.
ASSET-D-28: The behavior of the ML system
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files.
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot.
Non-RT RIC Data Pillar Assets
This clause will be updated when Non-RT RIC/SMO architecture is finalized.
rApp and Non-RT RIC Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: rApp and Non-RT RIC Data Pillar Gap Analysis
rApp and Non-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Analysis
rApp Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-C-10: rApps.
ASSET-C-12: ML components deploying machine learning such as: ML training and interference hosts, ML applications (xApps, rApps).
Non-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
This clause will be updated when Non-RT RIC/SMO architecture is finalized.
Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: rApp and Non-RT RIC Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
rApp and Non-RT RIC Identity Pillar Analysis
rApp Identity Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-C-10: rApps.
ASSET-C-12: ML components deploying machine learning such as: ML training and interference hosts, ML applications (xApps, rApps).
Non-RT RIC Identity Pillar Assets
This clause will be updated when Non-RT RIC/SMO architecture is finalized.
Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: rApp and Non-RT RIC Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
rApp and Non-RT RIC Networks Pillar Analysis
rApp Networks Pillar Assets
No asset(s) applicable to this specific pillar.
Non-RT RIC Networks Pillar Assets
This clause will be updated when Non-RT RIC/SMO architecture is finalized.
rApp and Non-RT RIC Devices Pillar Analysis
rApp Devices Pillar Assets
This clause will be updated when Non-RT RIC/SMO architecture is finalized.
Non-RT RIC Devices Pillar Assets
This clause will be updated when Non-RT RIC/SMO architecture is finalized.
A1 Interface Gap Analysis
A1 Interface Data Pillar Analysis
A1 Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-D-07: A1 policies that are provided to the near-RT RIC over the A1 interface.
ASSET-D-08: A1 Enrichment Information.
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates in O-RAN network such as those used for O-RAN components for authentication, encryption, and signing.
ASSET-D-17: Security private keys in O-RAN network such as those used for O-RAN components for authentication, encryption, and signing.
ASSET-D-25: Training or test data and associated labels: data sets collected externally or internally from the Near-RT RIC, O-CU and O-DU and passed to the ML training hosts in a ML system.
ASSET-D-30: O-RAN specific several UE IDs.
The gap analysis for ASSET-D-16, ASSET-D-17, and ASSET-D-30 is detailed in clause 7.3.2.
Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: A1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
A1 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar
A1 Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
No asset(s) applicable to this specific pillar.
A1 Interface Identity Pillar Analysis
A1 Identity Pillar Assets
No asset(s) applicable to this specific pillar.
A1 Interface Networks Pillar Analysis
A1 Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-C-14: A1 interface, including protocol stack.
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: A1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
A1 Interface Devices Pillar Analysis
A1 Devices Pillar Assets
No asset(s) applicable to this specific pillar.
R1 Interface Gap Analysis
R1 Interface Data Pillar Analysis
R1 Data Pillar Assets
Data transported over the R1 Interface.
R1 Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: R1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
R1 Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Analysis
R1 Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
No asset(s) applicable to this specific pillar.
R1 Interface Identity Pillar Analysis
R1 Identity Pillar Assets
No asset(s) applicable to this specific pillar.
R1 Interface Networks Pillar Analysis
R1 Interface Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-C-16: R1 interface, including protocol stack.
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: R1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
R1 Interface Devices Pillar Analysis
R1 Devices Pillar Assets
No asset(s) applicable to this specific pillar.
SMO Gap Analysis
This clause will be updated in a later version.
O1 Interface Gap Analysis
O1 Interface Data Pillar Analysis
O1 Interface Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-D-03: Critical Management-Plane data transported over the O1 interface
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates.
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN components associated and configuration data.
ASSET-D-23: Patches for vulnerable SW components
ASSET-D-24: NETCONF Configuration Access Control Model datastores
O1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O1 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
O1 Interface Application and Workloads Pillar
O1 Interface Application and Workloads Pillar Assets
No assets applicable to application and workloads pillar
O1 Interface Application and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis applies since there are no assets applicable to specific pillar
O1 Interface Identity Pillar
O1 Interface Identity Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
O1 Interface Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis applies since there are no assets applicable to specific pillar
O1 Interface Networks Pillar
O1 Interface Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4]:
ASSET-C-22: O1, including protocol stack
O1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O1 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
O1 Interface Devices Pillar
O1 Interface Devices Pillar Assets
No assets applicable to devices pillar
O1 Interface Devices Pillar Transversal Requirements
The following devices pillar functions are considered transversal and are covered in 7.3.2:
Policy Enforcement and Compliance Monitoring.
Asset & Supply Chain Risk Management.
O1 Interface Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
The Devices Pillar is out of scope for the gap analysis.
O-Cloud Gap Analysis
Data Pillar
O-Cloud Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates in O-RAN network such as those used for O-RAN components for authentication, encryption, and signing.
ASSET-D-17: Security private keys in O-RAN network such as those used for O-RAN components for authentication, encryption, and signing.
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN components associated and configuration data
ASSET-D-20: Credentials of O-Cloud components
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files generated by O-RAN components
ASSET-D-31: Security telemetry from the NFV system for detecting threats and anomalies
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot, for encryption/decryption
ASSET-D-33: Data transported over AALI-C-Mgmt interface
ASSET-D-34: Data transported over AALI-C-App & AALI-P interfaces
ASSET-D-35: Data transported over vendor-specific interface
ASSET-D-36: AAL profile
ASSET-D-37: AAL LPU
ASSET-D-38: Stored AAL data
Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-Cloud Data Pillar Gap Analysis
NOTE 1: Encryption of data in use is considered as Optimal stage according to O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Encryption.
Applications and Workloads Pillar
O-Cloud Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-C-08: O-Cloud (Covers DMS and IMS and their services)
ASSET-C-29: AAL software including software, libraries, drivers
ASSET-C-30: The hardware accelerator device firmware
Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-Cloud Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Identity Pillar
O-Cloud Identity Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-C-08: O-Cloud (Covers DMS and IMS and their services)
ASSET-C-29: AAL software including software, libraries, drivers
ASSET-C-30: The hardware accelerator device firmware
Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-Cloud Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Networks Pillar
O-Cloud Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-C-08: O-Cloud (Covers DMS and IMS and their services)
NOTE: O2 interface’s networks pillar assets are covered in clause 7.3.12.4
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-Cloud Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
NOTE 1: Encryption of data in use is considered as Optimal stage according to O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Encryption.
Devices Pillar
O-Cloud Devices Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in this document are as follows:
ZT-OCLOUD-I-X1: O-Cloud hardware
Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-Cloud Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
NOTE 1: Fine grained access to AAL applications when accessing accelerator device resources is considered as advanced stage according to O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Resource Access.
O2 Interface Gap Analysis
Data Pillar
O2 interface Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are as follows:
ASSET-D-14: O-Cloud Provisioning information, O-Cloud software management information
ASSET-D-15: O-RAN Cloudified Network Function Software
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN components associated and configuration data
Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O2 Interface Data Pillar Gap Analysis
NOTE 1: Encryption of data in use is considered as Optimal stage according to O-RAN ZTA Security Requirements for Data Encryption.
Applications and Workloads Pillar
O2 interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar.
Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
No asset applicable to specific pillar.
Identity Pillar
O2 interface Identity Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar.
Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
No asset applicable to specific pillar.
Networks Pillar
O2 interface Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in this document are as follows:
ZT-OCLOUD-S-X1: O2ims services
ZT-OCLOUD-S-X2: O2dms services
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O2 Interface Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Devices Pillar
O2 interface Devices Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar.
Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
No asset applicable to specific pillar.
O-CU Gap Analysis
Data Pillar
O-CU Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below.  The O-CU also has O1 and E2 interfaces as well, which are discussed separately in clauses 7.3.10 and 7.3.4 respectively.
The assets associated with the O-CU are:
ASSET-D-03: M-Plane O1 Data
ASSET-D-11: E2 Node Data (at rest)
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN components associated and configuration data.
ASSET-D-19: ETSI TS 133 501 cryptographic keys
ASSET-D-20: Credentials (Administrators)
ASSET-D-21: 3GPP application related data
ASSET-D-22: Inter- and Intra- slice UE priority
ASSET-D-23: Patches for vulnerable SW components
ASSET-D-24: NETCONF Configuration Access Control Model datastores.
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files.
ASSET-D-31: Security telemetry from the NFV system for detecting threats and anomalies.
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot
Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-CU Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Application and Workloads Pillar
O-CU Application and Workloads Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-CU also has O1 and E2 interfaces as well, which are discussed separately in clauses 7.3.10 and 7.3.4 respectively. The O-CU specific assets are as follows:
ASSET-C-03: O-CU-UP software.
ASSET-C-04: O-CU-CP software.
ASSET-C-36: CU-Host (Including software)
ASSET-C-37: CU-Tenant (Including software)
Application and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Note that in Table 7.3-27 below, the O-CU asset(s) are grouped together as the requirements and controls are apply at the NF level.
Table -: O-CU Application and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Identity Pillar
O-CU Identity Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-CU is considered a singular NF in terms of identity and does not have separate identities for each interface. The assets are listed as followed:
ASSET-C-12: PNF NF equipment
ASSET-C-36: CU-Host (Including software).
ASSET-C-37: CU-Tenant (Including software).
Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-CU Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Networks Pillar
O-CU Networks Pillar Assets
Currently there are no applicable assets or components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] for O-CU Network pillar.
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis required.
Devices Pillar
O-CU Devices Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-CU specific assets are as follows:
ASSET-C-12: PNF NF equipment
Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-CU Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
O-DU Gap Analysis
Data Pillar
O-DU Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below.  The O-DU also has O1 and E2 interfaces as well, which are discussed separately in clauses 7.3.10 and 7.3.4 respectively.
The unique assets associated with the O-DU are:
ASSET-D-01: Critical S-Plane Data
ASSET-D-02: Critical M-Plane Data transported over Fronthaul
ASSET-D-03: M-Plane O1 Data
ASSET-D-04: Critical C-Plane Data
ASSET-D-05: Critical Fronthaul U-Plane data
ASSET-D-11: E2 Node Data (at rest)
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN components associated and configuration data.
ASSET-D-20: Credentials (Administrators)
ASSET-D-22: Inter- and Intra- slice UE priority
ASSET-D-23: Patches for vulnerable SW components
ASSET-D-24: NETCONF Configuration Access Control Model datastores.
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files.
ASSET-D-31: Security telemetry from the NFV system for detecting threats and anomalies.
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot
Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-DU Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Applications and Workloads Pillar
O-DU Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-DU also has O1 and E2 interfaces as well, which are discussed separately in clauses 7.3.10 and 7.3.4 respectively. The O-DU specific assets are as follows:
ASSET-C-05: O-DU software.
ASSET-C-34: DU-Host (Including software)
ASSET-C-35: DU-Tenant (Including software)
Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Note that in Table 7.3-31 below, the O-DU asset(s) are grouped together as the requirements and controls are apply at the NF level.
Table -: O-DU Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Identity Pillar
O-DU Identity Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-DU is considered the NF in terms of identity and the O1 or E2 interface is not considered separate. The assets are as follows:
ASSET-C-12: PNF NF equipment
ASSET-C-34: DU-Host (Including software).
ASSET-C-35: DU-Tenant (Including software).
Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-DU Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Networks Pillar
O-DU Networks Pillar Assets
Currently there are no applicable assets or components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] for O-DU Network pillar.
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
No gap analysis required.
Devices Pillar
O-DU Devices Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4]. The O-DU specific assets are as follows:
ASSET-C-12: PNF NF equipment
Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
Table 7.3-33: O-DU Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
O-RU Gap Analysis
Data Pillar
O-RU Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below.
The unique assets associated with the O-RU are:
ASSET-D-01: Critical S-Plane Data
ASSET-D-02: Critical M-Plane Data transported over Fronthaul
ASSET-D-04: Critical C-Plane Data
ASSET-D-05: Critical Fronthaul U-Plane data
ASSET-D-06: Reference signals, synchronization signal and channels in downlink and uplink between O-RU and UE
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN components associated and configuration data.
ASSET-D-20: Credentials (Administrators)
ASSET-D-23: Patches for vulnerable SW components
ASSET-D-24: NETCONF Configuration Access Control Model datastores.
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files.
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot
Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-RU Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Application and Workloads Pillar
O-RU Application and Workloads Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-RU specific assets are as follows:
ASSET-C-06: O-RU software.
ASSET-C-32: O-RU Host
ASSET-C-33: O-RU Tenant (Shared Resource Operator)
Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Note that in Table 7.3-25 below, the O-RU asset(s) are grouped together as the requirements and controls are apply at the NF level.
Table -: O-RU Applications and Workloads Pillar Gap Analysis
Identity Pillar
O-RU Identity Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-RU is considered as a PNF in terms of identity and O-RU specific assets are as follows.
ASSET-C-12: PNF NF equipment
ASSET-C-32: O-RU Host
ASSET-C-33: O-RU Tenant (Shared Resource Operator)
Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-RU Identity Pillar Gap Analysis
Networks Pillar
O-RU Networks Pillar Assets
Currently there are no applicable assets or components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] for O-RU Network pillar.
Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
No Gap Analysis required.
Devices Pillar
O-RU Devices Pillar Assets
The applicable assets and components defined in the WG11 O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment [i.4] are listed below. The O-RU specific assets are as follows:
ASSET-C-12: PNF NF equipment
Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
Table -: O-RU Devices Pillar Gap Analysis
Open Fronthaul Gap Analysis
Introduction
The Open Fronthaul assets considers the Open Fronthaul interface as well as the architecture elements which includes the O-DU and O-RU.  The gap analysis is considered only for the Open Fronthaul interface. The Transport Network Element, Fronthaul Multiplexer, Fronthaul Gateway are considered new assets and not included in the Gap Analysis.
Data Pillar
Open Fronthaul Interface Data Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment document [i.4] are as following:
ASSET-D-01:  Critical S-Plane Data
ASSET-D-02: Critical Management-Plane data transported over the Fronthaul interface such as: maintenance and monitoring signals, data collected related to O-RU operations, logs (troubleshooting, trace)
ASSET-D-04: Critical C-Plane data
ASSET-D-05: Critical Fronthaul U-Plane data
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates in O-RAN network such as those used for O-RAN components for authentication, encryption, and signing.
ASSET-D-17: Security private keys in O-RAN network such as those used for O-RAN components for authentication, encryption, and signing.
Gap Analysis for Open Fronthaul Assets
Table -: Open Fronthaul Data Pillar Gap Analysis
Applications and Workloads Pillar
Open Fronthaul Interface Applications and Workloads Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Identity Pillar
Open Fronthaul Interface Identity Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
Networks Pillar
Open Fronthaul Interface Networks Pillar Assets
The applicable assets defined in the WG11 Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment document [i.4] are as following:
ASSET-C-24: OFH M-Plane, including protocol stack
ASSET-C-25: OFH CUS-Plane, including protocol stack
Gap Analysis for Open Fronthaul assets
Table -: Open Fronthaul Networks Pillar Gap Analysis
Devices Pillar
Open Fronthaul Devices Pillar Assets
No asset applicable to specific pillar
WG11 Considerations for Mapping Security Controls to CISA ZTMM
Introduction
The following considerations were made when mapping O-RAN security controls to the CISA ZTMM, as summarized in this list below:
List 7.4-1: Summary of CISA ZTMM Stages
Traditional stage
Perimeter-based security controls
Perimeter-based monitoring
Static network policies
Manual processes
Initial stage
External controls and some security controls to protect against internal threats
Monitoring with known indicators
Tailored policies
Some automation
Begin cloud migration
Advanced stage
Security controls to protect against internal and external threats
Centralized visibility
Continuous monitoring of network
Tailored policies
Automation
Optimal stage
Security controls to protect against internal and external threats
Centralized visibility with situational awareness
Continuous Monitoring of network, applications, and users
Dynamic policies with AI
Automation with AI
Mapping to CISA ZTMM
The O-RAN ALLIANCE has made significant progress advancing its security specifications.  Table 7.4-1 shows how the currently specified security controls map to the CISA ZTMM stages. Some additional considerations made when mapping O-RAN specifications to the stages are as follow:
The Devices pillar includes User Equipment and cloud infrastructure devices.
The Networks pillar includes data-in-transit.
The Applications pillar includes O-RAN architecture elements, such as O-RAN CNFs, SMO, and rApps/xApps.
The Data pillar includes data-in-transit, data-at-rest, and data-in-use.
Table -: CISA ZTMM Mapping of O-RAN security controls
NOTE:	Bold indicates an O-RAN specifications roadmap feature currently being addressed in a WG11 security work item.
ZTA Threats
Introduction
This clause reviews the O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment TR [i.4] for existing threats.
Mapping of the existing Security Principles to ZT Tenets
In the O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment TR [i.4] all Threats are being mapped to Security Principles (see [i.4] clause 8.2). In order to analyse which of the Threats are related to ZT tenets and whether they are properly covered by security principles, the security principles need to be mapped to the ZT tenets. [i.4] clause 8 provides such a mapping. Table 8.2-1 represents this mapping, which has been updated for the O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment TR.
Table -: Mapping of security principles to ZT tenets1
NOTE 1:	X: mapping existing in [i.4].
NOTE 2:  Access to resources is determined by dynamic policy which is mapped in the above Table 8.2-1 for SP-ACC - Access Control (Tenet 4) need to be discussed further.
Existing defined threats
<Identify relevant existing threats from WG11 work item Technical Reports>
New threats
<Identify new threats>
Threat analysis
<More detailed description and analysis of new threats using STRIDE. (Existing threats already have analysis completed.)>
Risk assessment
<Risk assessment to categorize new threats>
Recommendations
The following preliminary recommendations from this work item will be addressed in future updates to this technical report and other specifications:
Complete threat and risk assessment: Update clauses 8, 9 and 10 with identification of new threats and threat analysis and risk assessment for the newly identified threats.
Conduct Gap Analysis: Perform a gap analysis for different O-RAN assets based on the guidelines in clause 6.2 and update clause 7.3 accordingly.
Status: Gap analysis on O-RAN architecture elements and O-RAN interfaces is complete with the exception of the SMO. The gap analysis on the SMO will be performed after the Decoupled SMO architecture is finalized.
Propose ZTA Security Requirements: Based on the conducted gap analysis, propose a list of Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) security requirements for different O-RAN assets after consultation with the relevant WG11 Work Items and update clause 11 with those recommended security requirements.
ZTA WI should identify which requirements are in-scope for O-RAN ZTA but not in-scope for O-RAN specifications.
ZTA WI should determine whether security specifications for human administrative access to O-RAN architecture elements are in-scope for O-RAN specifications.
Status: Consultation with the respective Work Items is in progress.
Define relevant terms: ZTA WI should define the terms 'micro-perimeter' and 'micro-segmentation' in the context of O-RAN, while considering exiting definitions from authoritative sources.
Outcome: Micro-segmentation term is defined in this document.
Identify Continuous Monitoring Needs: Based on the study of NIST ZT tenets applicability in clause 4.2 and the target ZTA security requirements in clause 6.2, continuous monitoring is identified as a critical aspect of ZTA for the following reasons:
It is critical to fully address tenet 4, 5 and 7.
It is critical to fully address the following CISA ZTMM functions:
Risk assessment function and visibility and analytics capability in the Identity pillar.
Asset & supply chain risk management function, resource access function, and visibility and analytics capability in the Devices pillar.
Network traffic management and visibility and analytics capability in the Networks pillar.
Application access and visibility and analytics capability in the Applications and Workloads pillar.
Visibility and analytics capability in the Data pillar.
Therefore, we recommend conducting a comprehensive study on continuous monitoring in O-RAN as a separate supporting work item or work items. This WI or WIs should define the critical characteristics and attributes that need to be continuously captured in different O-RAN components to address tenets 4, 5, and 7, as well as the CISA ZTMM functions and capabilities listed above.
Outcome: WG11 Continuous Security Monitoring Work Item was initiated in August 2024.
Annex: 
Change history/Change request (history)