O-RAN.WG10.OAM-Architecture-v05.00
O-RAN.WG10.OAM-Architecture-v05.00
Technical Specification
O-RAN
Copyright © 2021 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.
By using, accessing or downloading any part of this O-RAN specification document, including by copying, saving, distributing, displaying or preparing derivatives of, you agree to be and are bound to the terms of the O-RAN Adopter License Agreement contained in Annex ZZZ of this specification. All other rights reserved.
O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.
Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany
Register of Associations, Bonn VR 11238
VAT ID DE321720189
Contents
Introductory Material	4
1.1	Scope	4
1.2	References	4
1.3	Definitions and Abbreviations	5
1.3.1	Definitions	5
1.3.2	Abbreviations	6
Chapter 2.	O-RAN Overview	7
2.1	Scope and Objectives	7
2.2	End to End OAM Use Cases	7
2.2.1	O-RAN Service Provisioning	7
2.2.2	O-RAN Measurement Data Collection	12
2.2.3	O-RAN Configuration Provisioning	19
Chapter 3.	OAM Architecture	23
3.1	Architectural Principles	23
3.2	Architecture Requirements	23
3.2.1	Functional Requirements	23
3.2.2	Non-Functional Requirements	24
3.2.3	Security Requirements	24
3.3	Reference Architecture	24
3.3.1	Architectural Building Blocks	24
3.3.2	Basic OAM Architecture	27
3.3.3	OAM Models and Deployment Options	27
3.3.4	Managed Elements Deployed behind a NAT	28
Chapter 4.	Application Lifecycle Management (LCM)	30
4.1	Scope	30
4.1.1	Information Model	31
4.1.2	App Development Lifecycles	32
4.1.3	App Onboarding Lifecycles	34
4.1.4	App Operation Lifecycles	36
4.2	Common Application Lifecycle Conclusions	36
4.2.1	Information Consumers	36
4.2.2	Solution SW Package Lifecycle	37
4.2.3	Onboarded SW Package Lifecycles	37
4.2.4	Onboarded App Descriptor Certification Lifecycle	38
4.2.5	App Descriptor Training Lifecycle	38
4.2.6	Deploy Instance Lifecycle	38
Appendix A: Cardinality	40
Appendix B: Sequence Diagram Template	41
Appendix C: [Informational] Common App Lifecyle Flows	49
Annex A: SMO and Non-RT RIC mapping with 3GPP management system	59
Annex ZZZ : O-RAN Adopter License Agreement	61
Section 1: DEFINITIONS	61
Section 2: COPYRIGHT LICENSE	61
Section 3: FRAND LICENSE	61
Section 4: TERM AND TERMINATION	62
Section 5: CONFIDENTIALITY	62
Section 6: INDEMNIFICATION	62
Section 7: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY; NO WARRANTY	63
Section 8: ASSIGNMENT	63
Section 9: THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY RIGHTS	63
Section 10: BINDING ON AFFILIATES	63
Section 11: GENERAL	63
Introductory Material
Scope
This Technical Specification has been produced by the O-RAN.org.
The contents of the present document are subject to continuing work within O-RAN WG1 and may change following formal o-RAN approval. Should the o-RAN.org modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by o-RAN Alliance with an identifying change of release date and an increase in version number as follows:
Release x.y.z
where:
x	the first digit is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e., technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have x=01).
y	the second digit is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document.
z	the third digit included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process.
The present document studies O-RAN OAM architecture and interface functions. The OAM architecture supports a variety of management network deployment models, including the model of management entities (NMS/EMS/MANO) connecting directly to NEs, and the indirect connection (e.g., M-Plane involved) model. A separate OAM interface document provides details of the functions and protocols conveyed over the interface, that include management functions, procedures, operations and corresponding solutions.
References
The following documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of the present document.
-	References are either specific (identified by date of publication, edition number, version number, etc.) or non-specific.
-	For a specific reference, subsequent revisions do not apply.
-	For a non-specific reference, the latest version applies. In the case of a reference to a 3GPP document (including a GSM document), a non-specific reference implicitly refers to the latest version of that document in Release 16.
3GPP TR 21.905: “Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications”
3GPP TS 38.401: "NG-RAN; Architecture description".
3GPP TS 28.622: "Telecommunication management; Generic Network Resource Model (NRM) Integration Reference Point (IRP); Information Service (IS)".
3GPP TS 32.101: “Telecommunication management; Principles and high level requirements”.
3GPP TS 28.532: Management and orchestration; Generic management services
3GPP TS 28.533: Management and orchestration; Architecture framework
3GPP TS 28.550: Management and orchestration; Performance assurance
3GPP TS 28.552: Management and orchestration; 5G performance measurements
ETSI GS NFV-IFA 005 V3.3.1 (2019-08), Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV) Release 3;Management and Orchestration;Or-Vi reference point - Interface and Information Model Specification
ETSI GS NFV-IFA 027 V2.4.1 (2018-05), Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV) Release 2;Management and Orchestration; Performance Measurements Specification
O-RAN White Paper: “O-RAN: Towards an Open and Smart RAN”, October 2018
O-RAN-WG4.MP.0-v05.00: O-RAN Alliance Working Group 4 Management Plane Specification
O-RAN.WG1.O1-Interface-v05.00: “O-RAN Operations and Maintenance Interface Specification”.
ORAN.WG2.Use Case Requirements v03.00: “O-RAN Working Group 2 (Non-RT RIC & A1 interface)”.
O-RAN.WG6.CAD-v02.02, “Cloud Architecture and Deployment Scenarios for O-RAN Virtualized RAN”
O-RAN.WG6.ORC-v02.01, “Orchestration Use Cases for O-RAN Virtualized RAN”
O-RAN.WG1-O-RAN Architecture Description - v04.00: “O-RAN Architecture Description”.
ORAN.WG3.E2GAP.0-v0.1: “O-RAN Working Group 3; Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller Architecture & E2 General Aspects and Principles”.
: “O-RAN Working Group 3;Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller; Near-RT RIC Architecture”
3GPP TR 28.809 v0.2.0, Study on enhancement of management data analytics
O-RAN-WG6.O2-GA&P-v01.01: “O2 General Aspects and Principles”
https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html, "YAML Ain’t Markup Language (YAML™) Version 1.2", October 2009
O-RAN.WG1.Information Model and Data Models-v01.00: “O-RAN Information Model and Data Models Specification”
O-RAN.SFG-O-RAN-Security-Requirements-Specification-v01.00: “O-RAN Security Requirements v1.0”
RFC 6241, “Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)”, IETF, June 2011
O-RAN.WG5.MP.0-v02.00, ”O1 Interface specification for O-DU”
Definitions and Abbreviations
Definitions
For the purposes of the present document, the terms and definitions given in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1] and the following apply. A term defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same term, if any, in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1].
Also, any terms and definitions that are also given in the O-RAN Architecture [17] are intended to be aligned.  Text in the O-RAN Architecture [17] takes precedence in case of any difference.
infrastructure resources: Infrastructure resources as used here refer to a set of resources provided to a VNF [9] by its supporting O-Cloud.
Service Planning: The activity of a Service Operator around certifying a solution configuration for deployment into their network.
Service Provider: A network provider who is planning to deploy applications into their network.
Solution Provider: An application developer who delivers applications to Service Providers.
"SP" Exchange: Not a formal interface in terms of between systems. However, the structure and content of the exchange is defined such that a Solution Provider can deliver applications to a Service Provider for deployment.
Definitions for the following terms used in the document can be found in the O-RAN Architecture [17]:
near-RT RIC
non-RT RIC
NMS
O-Cloud
O-CU
O-CU-CP
O-CU-UP
O-DU
O-RU
O1
O2
SMO
rApp
xApp
Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1] and the following apply. An abbreviation defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same abbreviation, if any, in 3GPP TR 21.905 [1].
FCAPS	Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance, Security
FOCOM	Federated O-Cloud Orchestration and Management
MA	Managed Application
ME	Managed Element
MF	Managed Function
MMP	Meet-Me-Point
NAT	Network Address Translation
Near-RT RIC      O-RAN near real time RAN Intelligent Controller
NFO	Network Function Orchestration
NFV 	Network Function Virtualization
NFVI	Network Function Virtualization Infrastructure
NM 	Network Manager
Non-RT RIC	O-RAN non-real time RAN Intelligent Controller
O-CU-CP	O-RAN Central Unit – Control Plane.
O-CU-UP	O-RAN Central Unit – User Plane
O-DU	O-RAN Distributed Unit
O-RU	O-RAN Radio Unit
PCP	Port Control Protocol
PK	Primary Key
PNF 	Physical Network Function
RAN	Radio Access Network
SDLC	Software Development LifeCycle
SMO	Service Management and Orchestration
VNF 	Virtualized Network Function
VPN	Virtual Private Network
UPNP	Universal Plug-N-Play
O-RAN Overview
Scope and Objectives
O-RAN activities are guided by the following objectives [11]:
•	Leading the industry towards open, interoperable interfaces, RAN virtualization, and big data and AI enabled RAN intelligence.
•	Maximizing the use of common-off-the-shelf hardware and merchant silicon and minimizing proprietary hardware
•	Specifying APIs and interfaces, driving standards to adopt them as appropriate, and exploring open source where appropriate
The O-RAN OAM Architecture identifies management services, managed functions and managed elements supported in O-RAN, including the interworking between service management and orchestration and other O-RAN components such as infrastructure management.  Requirements are derived from end-to-end OAM use cases, initially using the initial provisioning of O-RAN service across VNFs and PNFs as the primary use case.  The architecture identifies the interfaces between O-RAN Service Management and Orchestration and Managed Elements for different models and example deployment options.  It provides a description of the LifeCycle Management for applications delivered from a Solution Provider to a Service Provider/Network Operator.
Future versions of the architecture will address additional areas of O-RAN OAM functionality.
End to End OAM Use Cases
This section contains end to end OAM use cases that O-RAN is expected to support.  Requirements will be derived from the use cases.
The initial use cases defined include O-RAN Service Provisioning and Data Collection.  Additional Use Cases will be added as prioritized by the O-RAN community in future versions of this document
O-RAN Service Provisioning
Basic Objective
In the O-RAN architecture, the radio side includes Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU, and O-RU Managed Functions, and the management side is comprised of the Service Management and Orchestration Framework (including the Non-RT RIC). In the NFV environment, O-RAN network elements can also be implemented in a virtualized form, and thus include an Infrastructure layer (e.g., COTS/White Box/Peripheral hardware and virtualization layer) based on an O-Cloud.
The current use case focuses on network/element deployment rather than physical construction. According to the radio coverage requirement, operators could deploy the O-RAN network/element on dedicated physical resources and/or virtualized resources in a specific area.
This use case assumes that the network elements are deployed based on an example Network Design using VNFs for centralized functions and PNFs for functions closer to the customer, so that the sequence calls for deployment of VNFs for the Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP and O-CU-UP first followed by PNFs for the O-DU and O-RU. Note: RF functions must always be realized as PNFs but the O-DU can be realized as a PNF or VNF; this document uses PNF as an example to illustrate the associated OAM flows.
It is also assumed that secure network connectivity is already available between RAN components.
Entities/Resources involved
To support the O-RAN network provisioning, the Service Management and Orchestration Framework needs to support the following capabilities:
O-RAN network element deployed in selected area
For non-virtualized parts, the Service Management and Orchestration Framework supports the deployment of physical network elements on the target dedicated physical resources which satisfy the coverage requirements, with management through the O1 interface.
For virtualized network elements, the Service Management and Orchestration Framework has the capability to interact with the O-Cloud to perform network element life cycle management, e.g. instantiate the virtualized network element on the target infrastructure through the O2 interface (e.g., indicate the selected geo-location for each VNF to be instantiated, where close to the PNFs).
The Service Management and Orchestration Framework has the capability to consume the provisioning management service through the O1 interface to manage the configuration of the network element, details are defined in O-RAN.WG1.OAM Interface Specification [13].
O-RAN network provisioning
Based on the deployed network elements, the Service Management and Orchestration Framework configures the IP addressing, etc. in the PNFs and VNFs to support connectivity between them (this operation could also be performed during the instantiation steps).
Operators can operate and maintain the network dynamically through the O1 and/or O2 interface by means of:
Reconfiguration of the network elements
System update (usually refers to software management, without adding network elements) and system upgrade (the network elements could be added/removed/modified)
According to above, the Service Management and Orchestration Framework together with the O-Cloud implements the O-RAN network element deployment and provisioning, creating an O-RAN network to provide service to consumers.
Solutions
Table 2.2.1-1 shows the O-RAN service provisioning procedures.
Table 2.2.1-1: O-RAN service provisioning
Figure 2.2.1-1: O-RAN Service Provisioning
O-RAN Measurement Data Collection
Basic Objective
In this use case, the Non-RT RIC as the intelligent management center located in Service Management and Orchestration Framework determines that measurement data is needed and interacts with the SMO OAM Functions to collect measurement data from network for AI/ML training/inference/analyzing, and then generate optimization operations in order to improve the end-to-end user service experience and the network performance.
According to the Service Management and Orchestration Framework, to fulfill the Non-RT RIC requested data collection, the following capability should be supported by the SMO (framework):
The SMO should support the MnS component Type A (defined in [6])generation and the corresponding operation performing (defined in [5] and [7]), according to the measurement data collection request from the Non-RT RIC
The SMO (framework) should support the MnS component type C (defined in [6]) consumption such as the measurement data requested by the Non-RT RIC
The current use case focuses on the Non-RT RIC requested measurement data collection and consumption, the SMO should generate the PM Job and perform the PM Job control operations accordingly, and the SMO (framework) should support the measurement data consumption by the Non-RT RIC.
Notes:
In the O-RAN SMO framework, in order to avoid the PM Job confliction, it is suggested that the SMO take the responsibility for generating the PM Job and performing the PM Job control related operations. The resolution of conflict resolving by the SMO is FFS.
In this use case, the network elements decide if the PM Job is acceptable or not, in other words, it is ultimately the network element (MnS producer) who decides whether the measurement data collection task can be established or not.
Specifications for collecting infrastructure measurements do not yet exist. The Measurement Data Collection procedures will be updated to comply with [15] once WG6 has published the specification.
The measurement data producer in the use case so far doesn’t refer to Network Slicing, but this will be added in the use case once the O-RAN network slice has been defined.
Entities/Resources involved
Roles in the PM Job Control related operations:
The Non-RT RIC: PM Job initiator
The SMO (framework): measurement service component type A consumer
To fulfill the Non-RT RIC requested measurement data collection by the SMO on the O1/O2 interface, the information related to the collection task should comply with section2.3 defined in [13].
The measurement data collection information provided by the Non-RT RIC should be converted into a PM Job, and any management operations to the data collection task requested by the Non-RT RIC should be converted into the O1/O2 interface supported PM Job control related management service operations by the SMO.
Roles in the NotifyFileReady subscribing:
SMO: management service component type A consumer (the referenceConsumer, defined in [5])
O-RAN MOs: Notification producer
Roles in the measurement data consumption:
SMO: management service component type C consumer
O-RAN MOs: streaming data producer
File Server: storage the measurement data file
Solutions
Measurement Data Collection Creation
Table 2.2.2-1 shows the procedure of the Non-RT RIC requested measurement data collection task fulfilled by the SMO on the O1/O2 interface.
Table 2.2.2-1: Measurement Data Collection Creation
Figure 2.2.2-1: Measurement Data Collection Creation
Measurement Data File Consumption
With the performance data file reporting method:
The measurement data file could be stored in a file server, and the path should be contained in the NotifyFileReady
Once the measurement data file has been prepared, the O-CU-CP instance shall report the notification NotifyFileReady to the SMO
Table 2.2.2-2 shows the measurement data file consumption
Table 2.2.2-2: Measurement Data File Ready Report
Figure 2.2.2-2: Measurement Data File Consumption
Measurement Streaming Data Consumption
With the streaming reporting method:
The consumer related information was taken to the producer in the operation of performance data collection creation.
The performance data streaming service producer shall establish streaming connection(s) to the consumer, in this use case, the O-CU-CP instance act as the performance data streaming service producer and the SMO as the consumer.
The O-CU-CP instance shall send measured data on the established connection(s).
The table 2.2.2-3 shows the streaming connection(s) establishment and streaming data consumption.
Table 2.2.2-3: Measurement Streaming Data Consumption
Figure 2.2.2-3: Measurement Streaming Data Consumption
O-RAN Configuration Provisioning
Basic Objective
The Provisioning Management Service provides the ability for the SMO to configure an O-RAN Managed Element (ME) and to receive Configuration Management (CM) notifications from an O-RAN ME.  The Configuration ME Use Case in this section shows how O-RAN uses NETCONF as specified in the O1 Interface Specification [13] to configure O-RAN Managed Elements.
Entities/Resources involved
Roles in the Provisioning Use Case:
SMO is the Provisioning MnS Consumer
ME is the Provisioning MnS Provider
Configure ME Use Case
The Configure ME Use Case illustrates the sequence of NETCONF commands and Provisioning MnS Procedures, as specified in the O1 Interface Specification [13], to configure a Managed Element.
Before issuing any NETCONF commands, the NETCONF session must be established.  Before changing the configuration of a ME, the appropriate target data store should be locked to prevent other NETCONF clients, non-NETCONF clients, and human users from interfering with the configuration changes.  Note that locking the data store is optional and is at the discretion of the SMO/operator.
Configuration changes are made using the Create Managed Object Instance Procedure, Delete Managed Object Instance Procedure or Modify Managed Object Instance Attributes procedure as specified in O-RAN O1 Interface Specification [13].  If desired, SMO may first read the current ME configuration using the Read Managed Object Instance Attributes Procedure as specified in O-RAN O1 Interface Specification [13], before modifying the configuration, in order to ensure that the SMO is synchronized with the current ME configuration. Note that reading the current configuration is optional and is at the discretion of the SMO/operator.  If the changes are made in a candidate data store, SMO must commit the changes to the running data store to make them effective.
If the SMO wishes to receive CM notifications, SMO must subscribe to CM notifications using the Subscription Control procedure, as specified in O-RAN O1 Interface Specification [13].
Multiple provisioning procedures can be executed in sequence, one at a time, under the same lock session.  When the SMO has finished sending all the commands that modify the configuration of the data store, the SMO should unlock the target data store so that other clients can make changes.  Note that unlocking the data store is optional and is at the discretion of the SMO/operator.
Finally, if the SMO has no more provisioning procedures to perform at this time, SMO can terminate the NETCONF session.  Note that terminating the NETCONF session is optional and is at the discretion of the SMO/operator.
Table 2.2.3-1 shows the End to End Use Case for the SMO to configure a ME.
Table 2.2.3-1: Configure ME
@startuml
skinparam sequenceArrowThickness 2
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
box “Service Management & \nOrchestration Framework” #gold
Participant “OAM Functions” as SMO
end box
box "O-RAN Managed Element"#lightpink
Participant “ME” as ME
end box
Opt If NETCONF session is not established
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> NETCONF Session Establishment
endnote
End
Opt
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> NETCONF Lock Data Store
endnote
End
== SMO configures the ME ==
Opt If SMO desires
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> Read MOI Attributes
Endnote
End
Loop until all commands are sent
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> Delete MOI and/or Create MOI and/or Modify MOI Attributes
Endnote
Opt If target DB is candidate
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> NETCONF Commit
Endnote
End Opt
Opt If SMO has subscribed to CM notifications
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> HTTPS CM notification
Endnote
End Opt
End Loop
== Configuration changes complete ==
Opt
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> NETCONF Unlock Data Store
endnote
End
Opt If SMO has no more NETCONF operations to perform
note over SMO, ME #lightblue
<<O1>> NETCONF Session Termination
endnote
End
@enduml
Figure 2.2.3-1: Configure ME
OAM Architecture
Architectural Principles
The following section provides architecture principals guiding the support of OAM in the O-RAN architecture. Common OAM functions should be supported through a common set of OAM interface protocols across the different components of the O-RAN architecture
Management Services should, to the degree possible, align with existing standards specifications:
3GPP 5G Specifications for management interfaces
ETSI NFV Specifications for life cycle management
O-RAN WG4.MP.0-v07.00 (Future enhancements to align to 3GPP can be considered.)
O-RAN OAM specifications should refer to the 3GPP and ETSI specs and not replicate them here.  O-RAN OAM specifications must identify needed extensions to support O-RAN and exceptions which cannot be supported.  It is the goal of O-RAN to drive any needed extensions into standards to maintain alignment between O-RAN and existing standards.
Architecture Requirements
Defines the Architecture requirements applicable to the O-RAN reference architecture.  Architecture requirements are derived from Use Cases to be supported and define the functional needs the architecture aims to satisfy.
The initial set of requirements in this document are derived from the O-RAN Service Provisioning Use Case.  More requirements may be added in future versions of the OAM Architecture.
Functional Requirements
Non-Functional Requirements
Security Requirements
Note: more detailed requirements for security will be  addressed in [24].
Reference Architecture
The reference architecture defines a set of basic architectural building blocks – management services, managed functions and managed elements – for the O-RAN management domain.
Architectural Building Blocks
Management Services
O-RAN Management Services offer capabilities to manage and orchestrate managed elements.   Managed elements expose their management services to managers.  Managers consume the management services.
Examples of Management Services supported by O-RAN include:
Provisioning
Fault Supervision
Performance Assurance
Trace Management
File Management
Software Management
Communication Surveillance
Startup and Registration of a Physical Network Function (PNF)
Instantiation and Termination of a Virtualized Network Function (VNF)
Scaling Management Services for VNF
'The definition of supported management services and their APIs will be covered in the OAM O1 Interface specification [13].
Managed Elements
The definition of a Managed Element (ME) is given in 3GPP TS 28.622 [3] section 4.3.3.  The ME is an IOC that supports communication over management interface(s) to the manager for purposes of control and monitoring.
Examples of O-RAN Managed Elements include:
O-RAN Managed Functions deployed individually as MEs (e.g., Near-RT RIC ME, CU-CP ME, CU-UP ME, O-DU ME, O-RU ME).
Central Unit (CU) composed of CU-CP and CU-UP
ME composed of Near-RT RIC, CU-CP, CU-UP, DU and RU
A variety of deployment examples and their OAM interfaces are given in a later section. Choice of deployment options will be based on operator requirements.
A key motivation for the Managed Element concept is that an ME is a tightly integrated and tested group of MFs that are deployed together.  This has implications on how software updates are managed, because all software updates need to retain the property that all MFs in the ME have been tested together.  Depending on the deployment scenario and other considerations, the MFs may be grouped in different ways.  An interface is required to each ME, which can manage the communications to each MF that is contained within it.  Following sections present many examples of how the O1 interface can connect to either an ME that contains an individual MF, or to an integrated ME that contains multiple MFs.
Managed Functions
The definition of a Managed Function (MF) is given in 3GPP TS 28.622 [3] section 4.3.4.  An MF instance is managed using the management interface(s) exposed by its containing ME instance.
O-RAN managed functions include:
Near-Real-Time Radio Intelligent Controller (Near-RT RIC)
O-RAN Central Unit – Control Plane (O-CU-CP)
O-RAN Central Unit – User Plane (O-CU-UP)
O-RAN Distributed Unit (O-DU)
O-RAN Radio Unit (O-RU)
Managed Applications
ManagedApplication: This Information Object Class (IOC) represents a software application that may be independently tested and separately deployed from its containing ManagedFunction instance. The containing ManagedFunction instance mediates the management service for the Managed Application. A ManagedFunction instance may have zero or more Managed Application instances.
The xApp is defined in [19].  Management of the xApp shall comply with the following principles:
The O1 interface terminates on the Near-RT RIC platform ME, the Near-RT RIC platform delegates the management of xApps
xApp could be provided by the third party, it is decoupled from the O-RAN nodes, O-RAN node supports one or more xApp running on it
In order to model a variety of different types of xApps, it is necessary to extend common features of a parent Class, and the specific xApp IOC could inherit from its parent Class.
According to above principles, the modeling to the xApp could be described as the following:
xApp IOC represents the management aspects of the xApp
xApp IOC inherits from ManagedApplication and could extend specific attributes.
The details of the MA will be defined in the O-RAN Information Model document [23].
Service Management and Orchestration Framework
Service Management and Orchestration Framework is responsible for the management and orchestration of the managed elements under its span of control.  The framework can for example be a third-party Network Management System (NMS) or orchestration platform.
Service Management and Orchestration Framework must provide an integration fabric and data services for the managed functions.  The integration fabric enables interoperation and communication between managed functions within the O-RAN domain.  Data services provide efficient data collection, storage and movement capabilities for the managed functions.  In order to implement multiple OAM architecture options together with RAN service modeling, the modeling of different OAM deployment options and OAM services (integration fabric etc.) must be supported by SMO
Non-Real Time Radio Intelligent Controller
The non-RT RIC is a part of the Service Management & Orchestration Framework and communicates to the near-RT RIC using the A1 interface. [11]
Non-RT control functionality (> 1s) and near-Real Time (near-RT) control functions (< 1s) are decoupled in the RIC. Non-RT functions include service and policy management, RAN analytics and model-training for some of the near-RT RIC functionality, and non-RT RIC optimization.
Control Loop Support
O-RAN defines 3 control loops with different latency bands [11]. It is not expected that these loops are hierarchical but instead run in parallel. This does not mean that an ME with an inner loop will not generate its own event as result of an inner loop failure, but it will not simply propagate the lower level event received by the inner loop. The three loops are roughly defined as:
Loop 1: In the DU for per TTI/msec resource scheduling (<10 millisecond)
Loop 2: In the Near-RT RIC and CU for resource optimization (10 milliseconds to 1 second)
Loop 3: In the Service Management and Orchestration Framework for ML Training, Trending, Orchestration (> 1 second)
Basic OAM Architecture
Figure 3.3.2-1 O-RAN Logical Architecture
Figure 3.3.2-1 shows the overall O-RAN Logical Architecture.  In the original white paper [11], the interface between the Manager and the O-RAN components for control purposes was identified as A1.  The O-RAN OAM Architecture adds another interface for OAM functions, labeled O1 (OAM). O1 is the interface between the O-RAN Managed Element and the management entity.  Note: the figure uses 5G terminology, however the same principles will apply for LTE/4G.  Mapping to LTE/4G may be added in future.  O-RAN OAM also adds the O2 interface for management of the O-Cloud, which has different requirements from the O1 interface and as defined in [21].
The O1 OAM Interface includes implementation of Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance, Security (FCAPS) functions, File management and Software management functions to ME (s) virtualized and physical alike. For details of the management services supported by O1, see [13].
The O2 OAM Interface enables the management of O-Cloud infrastructures and the deployment life cycle management of O-RAN cloudified NFs that run on an O-Cloud.  For details of the functions supported by O2, see [21].
As shown in the figure, there is a logical OAM interface to individual O-RAN Managed Functions, however in practice the grouping of Managed Functions into Managed Elements will determine where actual O1 interfaces are terminated.  More detail is explained in subsequent sections.  The O1 interface could be the terminated directly on the Service Management & Orchestration Framework or in a hierarchical model could be terminated on a Managed Element which manages other O-RAN Managed Functions.
The sections below identify possible management topologies, for example, the basic “flat” model of OAM relationships as well as the hierarchical model of O-DU to O-RU relationship and the hybrid model of O-DU to O-RU relationship defined in the O-RAN Front Haul M-Plane specification, as well as example deployment options.
OAM Models and Deployment Options
This section describes some of the possible O-RU management models, providing a high level description of the model and its current supported status in the O-RAN architecture.  It also explains that O-RAN supports multiple deployment options for O-RAN managed Functions and Elements as defined in section 3.3.1.2 of this document and references examples of those deployments. Adoption of a single O-RU management model or managed deployment option is not required in the O-RAN OAM Architecture. Multiple combinations of deployments may be supported in a network.
Flat Management Architecture Model
In the flat model, all entities/nodes are managed directly by the SMO.  This model is not currently supported for the O-RU and is for future study.
Hierarchical Management Architecture Model
In the hierarchical model, all entities/nodes except for O-RUs are managed directly by the SMO, but the O-RU is managed directly by the O-DU (and indirectly by the SMO).  The WG4 Fronthaul M-Plane Specification [12] documents the details of the use of the hierarchical model for the O-RAN O-RU.  The WG5 O1 Interface specification for O-DU [26] provides an initial view of the hierarchical management of the O-RU through the O-DU.
Hybrid Management Architecture Model
In the hybrid model, all entities/nodes except for O-RUs are managed directly by the SMO.  The O-RU is partially managed by the SMO (for FCAPS support) and partially managed by the O-DU. Details of the hybrid model for the O-RU including privilege division between SMO and O-DU can be found in the WG4 Fronthaul M-Plane Specification [12].
Example Managed Deployment Options
O-RAN also supports multiple deployment options for O-RAN Managed Functions and Managed Elements. The O-RAN Architecture document [17] has an informative Annex A which provides several examples of O-RAN deployments.  O-RAN supports individual MFs, as defined in section 3.3.1.2 of this document, deployed as MEs.    O-RAN also supports combinations of MFs deployed as MEs.  The choice of deployment option is at the discretion of the service provider.  Since many combinations are allowed, O-RAN Architecture Annex A presents examples of the possible deployments.
Managed Elements Deployed behind a NAT
Service Providers prefer to not deploy Managed Elements (ME) behind a NAT, but there are cases where this cannot be avoided, for example:
exhaustion of public IPv4 addresses
managed elements deployed in large complexes not owned by the Service Provider (Apartments, Sports Venues etc.)
managed elements connected via third-party networks using a NAT
When a Service Provider deploys managed elements behind a NAT it is critical that they are able to retain full management control of these elements.
Figure 3.3.4.1 O-RAN MEs behind a NAT
Four methods of providing the O-RAN Manager with the ability to address a ME behind a NAT and identify data received from a ME behind a NAT are recommended in priority order:
ME uses IPv6 as Backhaul transport where possible eliminating the need for a NAT - exhaustion of public IPv4 addresses
ME establishes persistent VPN tunnel (e.g., IPSec) toward a VPN concentrator (gateway) located outside of network with the NAT.  The ME is then accessible through the established tunnel.
ME uses a standard protocol (UPNP or PCP) to establish a port-forwarding rule at the firewall and automatically assign itself a port.
Service Provider manually configures the firewall to assign a port to each ME that resides within the protected network.
Application Lifecycle Management (LCM)
This chapter describes Lifecycle Management of applications that are developed by a Solution Provider and delivered to a Service Provider or Network Operator for deployment in O-RAN.  The chapter’s current focus is on LCM of rApps and xApps, as defined in [17].
Lifecycle Management follows the basic models of a Software Development Lifecycle by defining the transitional information from one state to another. There are several Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) definitions. For the purposes of discussion this document generally follows a 7-state model as shown in Figure 4-1. Some states might also include activities that align with other states. However, this level of detail is not depicted here in order to introduce those details later in the document.
A Service Provider or Network Operator has needs which are fulfilled by a Solution Provider. Once the Solution Provider delivers the application it is validated in a test environment prior to giving to operations to deploy.  Usage of the deployed application may result in changes to configuration by the Service Provider or may be feedback to Solution Providers to evolve the capabilities of the network and/or its management.
Although applications may come in many forms the delivery from the Solution Provider to the Service Provider needs to be done in a standardized manner. The seven steps defined in the SDLC are high level. Each may break down into a set of finer grain steps.
Scope
The end-to-end lifecycle involves two entities, the Solution Provider and the Service Provider. The Solution Provider provides applications for the Service Provider to use in their network. The working flow could be summarized as three phases: Development, Onboarding and Operations, as shown in Figure 4.1-2.
Figure 4.1-2 Application Lifecycle Phases
These applications need to be onboarded in a common manner, regardless of how they are deployed. This document focuses on the data that must be included in the App Package as it is exchanged between the Solution Provider and the Service Provider. This exchange is referred to as the "SP" exchange. This is not a formal interface between systems and therefore is not denoted as other O-RAN interfaces are. Care is given as not to put implementation or tooling mandates on either the Solution Provider in their development of the application, or the Service Provider in the aspect of training or deploying the application. Aspects of the lifecycle across both parties are introduced. However, not all aspects are discussed. Instead the focus is on those activities that affect the data contained in the SP Exchange.  Later in this document the term "Service Planning" is used to represent activities internal to the Service Provider. This is not the same as the "SP Exchange" used to describe the data passed from the Solution Provider to the Service Provider. The method of the SP Exchange is not defined in this document. It is sometimes referred to as the "Marketplace". The marketplace can be implemented by either the solution provider, the service provider, and an external entity to both. The Marketplace simply represents an exchange between entities which could be done by electronic means or physical media.
The App Development will provide application solutions w/wo AI/ML models, while “App Onboard” and “App Operate” will be responsible for application onboarding and operations. Considering the data privacy and security requirements, the application development could be completed in the environment provided by the Service Provider.
Applications utilize AI/ML models or not. Therefore, although the Model Information may be optional in the package, we will focus on the data exchange requirements for applications with AI/ML models as the superset.
Information Model
The following UML diagram illustrates the high-level composition of the Application Package (AppPackage). An Application Package is the basic unit exchanged between the Solution Provider and Service Provider. The attributes of the entities in the diagram are representative. The detailed contents are FFS and will be refined in a separate document.  This high-level model may be further updated as the detailed model is completed.
@startuml
hide members
Class AppPackage #Cyan
Class AppDescriptor #Gold
Class DeploymentDescriptor #LightSkyBlue
Class MLModelDescriptor #Pink
AppPackage --> DeploymentDescriptor : Has
AppPackage --> "May Have" MLModelDescriptor
AppPackage --> AppDescriptor: Has
Class ComponentDescriptor #Gold
Class AlarmDictionary #Gold
Class ConfigurationModel #Gold
Class AccountingDictionary #Gold
Class PerformanceDictionary #Gold
Class SecurityDescriptor #Gold
AppDescriptor -l-> ComponentDescriptor : Has
AppDescriptor --> AlarmDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> ConfigurationModel : Has
AppDescriptor --> AccountingDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> PerformanceDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> SecurityDescriptor : Has
Class CloudDescriptor #LightSkyBlue
DeploymentDescriptor --> CloudDescriptor : Has
Class CloudNativeDescriptorFile #Lime
CloudDescriptor --> ComponentDescriptor : May Have
CloudDescriptor -r-> CloudNativeDescriptorFile : Has
ComponentDescriptor -u-> MLModelDescriptor : May Have
Class DockerImage #Lime
Class RTEDescriptor #GreenYellow
ComponentDescriptor --> "Has" DockerImage
ComponentDescriptor --> "May Have" RTEDescriptor
@enduml
@startuml
hide members
Class AppPackage #Cyan
Class AppDescriptor #Gold
Class DeploymentDescriptor #LightSkyBlue
Class MLModelDescriptor #Pink
AppPackage --> DeploymentDescriptor : Has
AppPackage --> "May Have" MLModelDescriptor
AppPackage --> AppDescriptor: Has
Class ComponentDescriptor #Gold
Class AlarmDictionary #Gold
Class ConfigurationModel #Gold
Class AccountingDictionary #Gold
Class PerformanceDictionary #Gold
Class SecurityDescriptor #Gold
AppDescriptor -l-> ComponentDescriptor : Has
AppDescriptor --> AlarmDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> ConfigurationModel : Has
AppDescriptor --> AccountingDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> PerformanceDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> SecurityDescriptor : Has
Class CloudDescriptor #LightSkyBlue
DeploymentDescriptor --> CloudDescriptor : Has
Class CloudNativeDescriptorFile #Lime
CloudDescriptor --> ComponentDescriptor : May Have
CloudDescriptor -r-> CloudNativeDescriptorFile : Has
ComponentDescriptor -u-> MLModelDescriptor : May Have
Class DockerImage #Lime
Class RTEDescriptor #GreenYellow
ComponentDescriptor --> "Has" DockerImage
ComponentDescriptor --> "May Have" RTEDescriptor
@enduml
@startuml
hide members
Class DeploymentDescriptor #LightSkyBlue
Class AppPackage #Cyan
Class MLModelDescriptor #Pink
Class AppDescriptor #Gold
AppPackage --> DeploymentDescriptor : Has
AppPackage --> MLModelDescriptor : May Have
AppPackage --> AppDescriptor: Has
Class ComponentDescriptor #Gold
Class AlarmDictionary #Gold
Class ConfigurationModel #Gold
Class AccountingDictionary #Gold
Class PerformanceDictionary #Gold
Class SecurityDescriptor #Gold
AppDescriptor -l-> ComponentDescriptor : Has
AppDescriptor --> AlarmDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> ConfigurationModel : Has
AppDescriptor --> AccountingDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> PerformanceDictionary : Has
AppDescriptor --> SecurityDescriptor : Has
Class CloudDescriptor #LightSkyBlue
DeploymentDescriptor --> CloudDescriptor : Has
Class CloudNativeDescriptorFile #Lime
CloudDescriptor --> ComponentDescriptor : May Have
CloudDescriptor --> CloudNativeDescriptorFile : Has
Class DockerImage #Lime
Class RTEDescriptor #GreenYellow
ComponentDescriptor --> DockerImage : Has
ComponentDescriptor --> RTEDescriptor : May Have
@enduml
Figure 4.1-3 Application Package High Level Model
The following modifiers can be pre-pended to Information Model Elements to indicate context:
"Solution"	The version of the element as defined by the Solution Provider
"Onboarded"	The initial version of the catalogued elements created during onboarding.
"Catalogue"	Subsequent versions of the catalogued package or its elements which may have been adjusted by the Service Provider.
The AppPackage contains the DeploymentDescriptor and the AppDescriptor. An optional MLModelDescriptor is supplied for an application employing ML technology.
The DeploymentDescriptor describes the deployment options for the application that have been validated by the Solution Provider.  It includes one or more CloudDescriptors describing the requirements for O-Cloud deployment of the application.  The DeploymentDescriptor and CloudDescriptor are consumed by the SMO/NFO.
The AppDescriptor describes the application contained in the AppPackage.  It contains one or more ComponentDescriptors describing the components to be deployed as part of the application as well as elements used for FCAPS functions for the AppPackage such as an AlarmDictionary, ConfigurationModel, SecurityDescriptor, etc.  The AppDescriptor and its components are consumed by the SMO/FOCOM.  Note: Security requirements in general for O-RAN are discussed in more detail in [24].
ML Models may be pre-trained by the Solution Provider and therefore provide initial Training History. The Service Provider may also train the model or retrain the model with a more specialized data set, this is called specialization. The Training History provides the mechanism to record all training and subsequent specializations applied to that training through the Training History.
An example of specialization is a ML Model created to predict the flow of traffic volumes. This algorithm can be generally trained to follow road patterns for devices with a velocity greater than 20 miles per hour. This training could be done by the Solution Provider on a generalized or open data set and recorded in the MLModelDescriptor. After onboarding the Service Provider may provide specialized training for dense urban traffic patterns which don't always follow the roads due to periodic traffic congestion This would be an additional Training History record added by the Service Provider and referenced as specialization in the Catalogue Training History. Further refinement could also be applied for specific cities such as New York, Los Angeles, or San Francisco which would now add 3 specializations Catalogue Training History records relating to the dense urban Catalogue Training History which is a specialization if the Onboarded Training History.
Once a Catalogue DeploymentDescriptor is validated as safe for use in operations it is published to a runtime environment as a Published DeploymentDescriptor. Runtime instance data can be applied to the Published DeploymentDescriptor. Applications deployed as part of this activity are called App Instances. An App Instance running in the Non-RT RIC Runtime can be referred to as an rAPP instance.  An App Instance running in the near-RT RIC Runtime can be referred to as an xAPP instance. An App Instance running in a training environment is referred to as a Training App instance.
Diagramming Legend
The legend depicted in Figure 4.1-5 is used across all lifecycle diagrams in this section and is shown once so it is not required on every diagram. Bolded text on a diagram is an item identified as requiring further discussion later in the document. Text in Italics are items identified for completeness but not requiring further discussion. Meet-Me-Points (MMPs) are places where a major aspect of the lifecycle interchanges. Data may be exchanged through these MMPs but the exact mechanism of the exchange is outside the scope of this document. Destination or Decision points are color coded according to their user community. Destination or Decision points are not a contributing factor to the data demands of the "SP" Exchange and are therefore not named. Instead the actions or conditions that are used as a transition between points are named as the items of interest.
Figure 4.1-4: Life Cycle Diagram Legend
App Development Lifecycles
In the App Development Lifecycle only two aspects are defined, the Solution AppPackage Lifecycle and the Solution App Lifecycle.
Solution App Lifecycle
The Development Lifecycle steps related to the Solution App are shown below in Figure 4.1-6.
Figure 4.1-5: Solution App Development Lifecycle
Customer feedback can consist of use case requirements, feature requests, defect notifications, or a variety of other comments. These feed the development cycle to develop new application or enhance existing ones. Requirements are usually identified and sent to developers to implement. The outcome of the build process is the container images built using SDKs for their intended deployments. If the application is AI/ML enabled, then the training action is done. The training might happen with synthetic data or with data provided by Service Providers. Information on the training performed will be included in the Solution Training History. The completed Solution App is stored in a development repository.
Solution AppPackage Lifecycle
The Development Lifecycle steps related the Solution AppPackage are shown below in Figure 4.1-7.
Figure 4.1-6: Solution AppPackage App Development Lifecycle
The Solution AppPackage is used to convey the Solution App through the onboarding process to the Service Provider. It begins by pulling the App out of its repository and placing it in the package as mandated by the exchange requirements. Next security is applied such that the Service Provider can ensure that an Onboarded AppPackage did in fact come from the expected Solution Provider. The secure package, Solution AppPackage, is then delivered to the Service Provider for onboarding.
App Onboarding Lifecycles
The App Onboarding phase deals with establishing configuration, policies, measurements, and required analytics.
The App Onboarding Phase is involved with both AppPackages and Apps, each with its own steps and associated actions.  These will be treated separately.
Onboarded AppPackage Lifecycles
The Service Design steps associated with an Onboarded AppPackage are shown below:
Figure 4.1-7: Onboarded AppPackage Service Provider Configuration Lifecycle
An AppPackage is onboarded from the exchange, and its content verified.  If valid, its contents (the App) are unpacked and the Onboarded AppPackage and associated Onboarded App are catalogued.  If invalid, the Service Provider can provide AppPackage-level feedback to the Solution Provider via the Marketplace.
Onboarded App Lifecycles
The App Onboarding Phase for Onboarded Apps is split between normal processing for all applications, named "Configuration", and the lifecycle for "Training" Apps with included AI/ML Models. Workflow can interchange between these cycles iteratively.  We will treat each of these separately below.
Note: The Run Time Library shown in the sections below models a location where apps/Artifacts can be identified as ready for future deployment. It is not intended to imply any particular method of implementation of the SMO.  Additional modeling of SMO is subject to further study.
Onboarded App Certification Lifecycle
The Service Operator Certification steps associated with an Onboarded App are shown below:
Figure 4.1-8 Onboarded App Service Provider Certification Lifecycle
Onboarded Apps are made visible in the SMO environment when published into the catalogue. Each recommended configuration of the App is certified prior to publication to a runtime library. If Certification fails, then Service Planning will determine the next course of action.
Service Planning aggregates “fix” requests from Configuration which can be passed back to the Solution Provider (at the AppPackage level) as feedback across the SP interface of the Marketplace Exchange.   This exchange also aggregates “change” requests from Configuration or Operations and determines if the request is for additional development (a “feature” request) or additional training (a “training” request).  The former would be aggregated and passed back to the Solution Provider via the SP interface as described above for “fix” requests.  For the latter, the Service Design: Training lifecycle would ensue.
If the Onboarded App requires AI/ML training, then a request through Service Planning is used to train the model. When the "Specialized App " is returned, like non-ML Onboarded Apps it is catalogued and scheduled for certification. Once certified the App is distributed as a Published App to a Run Time Library. From there operations can deploy as either a management (rAPP) or network application instance (xAPP).
App Training Lifecycle
The Service Operator Training Lifecycle associated with a Training App is shown below:
Figure 4.1-9: Training App  Service Provider Training Lifecycle
When a training request is received then resources within the training environment are scheduled for the application. Data is collected and groomed for training after which a training iteration is executed. At the end of the training cycle a test set is applied to the model and accuracy is calculated. If the test fails or other metadata indicates more training iterations are required, then the cycle repeats. Once the model is adequately trained it is promoted and sent back to service planning for continuation in another lifecycle.
Inside the "Training Lifecycle" the process MAY require multiple iterations of training before being returned to the Service Planning MMP.
The iteration count SHALL be included in the specialization metadata info.
App Operation Lifecycles
There can be many runtime environments in the service providers’ network. Some can be production while others might be for non-production execution, such as offline training and lab certification. For this document we will focus on the runtime aspects of rAPPs, which execute within the Non-RT RIC as part of the SMO, and the xAPPs which execute in the near-RT RIC as part of the RAN. Although they have the same lifecycle steps the data demands due to their operational environment are different and therefore need to be independently addressed.
App Instance Lifecycles
Figure 4.1-10: Service Provider Runtime Lifecycles
After the App Instance is created through a deploy operation it is monitored. As monitoring reports the health and workload of the application it is scaled up and down based on demand. Based on monitoring result, a series of operation and management functions are triggered, such as alert management, event management, incident management and further analysis. The analysis results can be guidance for further actions such as termination, healing and scaling. Finally, when its job is completed, the instance is terminated. While in operation the service provider may discover defects, performance issues, or identify new features that would be beneficial. Such issue or change request will be communicated to the Service planning where the Application could be retrained or updated. The information can also be sent via the Service Planning to the Solution Provider as feedback.
Operations determine when an application is deployed, or undeployed. Since applications are atomic, the update process is an orchestrated process of deploy and terminate. It is possible for two versions to be active at the same time, but care must be given not to provide overlapping scopes to the application instances, otherwise they may give differing directives to the network in a random order. This could cause a destabilization of the network.
Common Application Lifecycle Conclusions
The initial conclusion of Common Application Lifecycle procedures is that there is a formalized exchange between the Solution Provider and the Service Provider, the "SP Exchange". The SP Exchange consists of data describing the package and its security. The package also contains information regarding Deployment Configurations, Application Types, Deployable Components, and potentially ML Models. Further details regarding the composition of these areas will be defined through analysis of the Actions identified in section 4.1 as an action requiring further analysis (Bolded). O-RAN use cases for App Operation Lifecycle actions beyond “Deploy” have not been specified. Therefore, the analysis of the App Operation Lifecycles has been limited to the “Deploy” action.
The analysis consists of identifying the actors within the LCM which need information. Each Information Object is then analyzed for the Actions identified above and what is needed by each actor is identified. The actor information requirements will then be coalesced into artifacts such that each artifact will only be consumed by one actor. This maintains a separation of concern regarding artifact composition for different consumers.
Information Consumers
The following actors are used in the analysis as consumers of information. The CNAD is unique in that it is also the producer of all the artifacts used to convey the information. However, since this is a basic premise it is not used in the analysis to describe its role in artifact generation.
Solution SW Package Lifecycle
The Solution SW package lifecycle deals with the Solution Provider creating a secure package that can be delivered to a Service Operator for onboarding. This largely deals with the addition of all the artifacts of the software into a library and then adding security around the files and the package. Annex section C.1 describes the processing of the artifacts into the package.
Functional Requirements
Onboarded SW Package Lifecycles
The Onboarded SW Package Lifecycles deal with the importing of an Application Package by first verifying its authenticity and then verifying is consistency. Assuming the package passes those tests the contained artifacts are extracted from the package and added to the SMO catalogue. Annex section C.2 describes the process of cataloguing the artifacts of the package.
Functional Requirements
Onboarded App Descriptor Certification Lifecycle
The Onboarded App Descriptor Certification Lifecycle entails certifying deployment options prior to utilization in a specific runtime environment. The SMO will initiate the fine tuning of such an App for this deployment option. This process may be iterative and the SMO will identify each refinement of the APP and certify the refinements results in App being suitable for inclusion in the run time library for deployment. Annex section C.3 describes the process of certify a deployment option of the package.
Functional Requirements
App Descriptor Training Lifecycle
The App Descriptor Training Lifecycle deals with the training of an AI/ML Model that was included as part of a deployment option in an application package. The model is trained, and the resultant deployment is returned as a new version of the application. Annex section C.4 describes the process of training an application deployment option which contains one or more ML Models.
Functional Requirements
Note 1: This requirement is overarching and generalized in nature. Specific requirements for rAPPs or xAPPs as specified by other Work Groups shall supersede this requirement when in conflict.
Deploy Instance Lifecycle
Deployment of an Application differs only slightly depending on if it is a CNF, xAPP, or rAPP. Basically, the process of registering with a Run Time Environment is not required when the application is a CNF. The xAPP and rAPP differ in the registration process and the mechanisms to connect the Application with other Applications of the same type is dependent on the framework used.
The use case for CNF deployment is in clause 3.2.1 of the WG6 Orchestration Use Cases and Requirements for O-RAN Virtualized RAN [16]. The use case for xAPP deployment is in clause 3.3.2 of the same document. An example use case for deployment of an rAPP is in Annex C.5 of this document.
Functional Requirements
Appendix A: Cardinality
This informative Appendix provides background information regarding the cardinality of different O-RAN architecture elements.  It is not intended as a requirement on cardinality.
The RAN network has an expected hierarchical fan out. Therefore, the O-RAN sizing would be:
Non-RT RIC (1..j)
Near-RT RIC (1..k)
CU-CP (1..m)
CU-UP (1..n)
O-DU (1..p)
O-RU (1..q)
Where: 1<=j; j<=k; k<=m; m<=n; m<=p; p<=q
Due to resiliency and scaling aspects of cloud implementations an O-DU will logically be connected to one CU-CP. The CU-CP may in fact be a pool of CU-CP instances to handle loads.
CU-UP MEs will be pooled and aligned with the services they are configured to serve. The CU-CP will assign the CU-UP that an O-DU needs to connect to for a given UE session.
An O-DU may serve many O-RU MEs depending on its designed capacity to manage the loop 1 processing.
One Near-RT RIC will be connected to multiple CU-CP, CU-UP, and O-DU MEs. For resiliency the MEs may be connected to more than one Near-RT RIC, however, it shall not require duplication of data to be sent to each RIC instance.
A Near-RT RIC will be connected to one non-RT RIC.
Appendix B: Sequence Diagram Template
This section provides a common template for the description of end-to-end use cases.
B.1 Installing the PlantUML plugin for windows
Follow the installation instructions found at: https://github.com/plantuml/word-template
The plantuml.jar file can be downloaded from: http://sourceforge.net/projects/plantuml/files/plantuml.jar/download
The word “*.dotm” file to use would be in the “Template_Word_16” (https://github.com/plantuml/word-template/tree/master/Template_Word_2016) link.
Once you have the plugin installed you can select “Show PlantUML” which will unhide the text used to generate the diagrams.
B.2 Plant UML Colors
The following Palette are the named colors recognized by PlantUML. Colors can also be defined by RGB Hexcode (RRGGBB).
@startuml
colors
@enduml
B.3 Depicting human actors as participants
The participant type Actor should be used. For Clarity these should be the first group and therefore always on the left side of the diagram. The color “#lightblue” has been identified as the background for this group of use case participants.
@startuml
Box “Personnel” #lightblue
Actor FT as “Field Technician”
Actor RP as “Radio Planner”
End box
@enduml
At times it may be desirable to identify external data sources. These would be presented using the same color as personnel but be titled as Non-RAN Data. The Source of the data would be identified as an “Entity”. The list of these could be immense but small within the context of a use case. Therefore, a few examples are shown below, and is not intended to be an exhaustive list.
@startuml
Box “Non-RAN Data” #lightblue
Entity weather as “Weather Data”
Entity fire as “Fire Data”
Entity earth as “Earthquake Data”
Entity subs as “Subscriber Data”
End box
@enduml
B.4 Depicting Service Management and Orchestration Participants
Service Management and Orchestration participants can vary by type. The following UML shows the standard types for defined participants. Participants  can be deleted when not pertinent to the use case but additional participants should be avoided unless they are defined in the O-RAN Architecture Description [17] or other O-RAN specifications.  For consistency SMO should be the second group unless the personnel group is not required which would make this the first group. The color “#gold” has been identified as the background for this group of use case participants.
The O-RAN Architecture [17]  identifies three types of functions in SMO: FCAPS for O-RAN Network Functions(named here as “OAM Functions”), Non-RT RIC, and O-Cloud Management, Orchestration and Workflow Management.   The O2 General Aspects and Principles [21] further distinguishes between management of the distribution of O-Cloud software and orchestration for O-Cloud life cycle processes, called “Federated O-Cloud Operations and Management”, or “FOCOM”, and coordination between SMO and the O-Cloud for managing deployment life cycle events and operational processes, called “Network Function Orchestration”, or “NFO”. These are shown as participants in the UML as below.
@startuml
Box “Service Orchestration and Management Framework” #gold
participant NFO
participant SMO as “OAM Functions”
Collections RPGF as “non-RT RIC”
Participant FOCOM
end box
@enduml
B.5 Depicting Cloud Platform Participants
As described in the O-Ran Architecture Description [17] the Cloud platform has two roles. These are depicted by the end points in the O-Cloud Management and Control Planes. The Infrastructure Management Services (IMS) provides management of the O-Cloud as a platform. The Deployment Management Services (DMS) provides management of Deployments using the O-Cloud resources. Like in the SMO the internal software modules and components to the O-Cloud can vary from implementation to implementation. Therefore it is not advised to add additional entities unless it is unavoidable for the use case. The color “#lightseagreen” has been identified as the background for this group of use case participants.
@startuml
Box “O-Cloud Platform” #lightseagreen
participant IMS
participant DMS
End box
@enduml
B.6 O-RAN Managed Elements as participants
The O-RAN architecture defines 5 Managed Functions (MF) which can be deployed independently or aggregated in different ways into a Managed Element (ME). The O-CU is a predefined aggregation of the O-CU-CP and O-CU-UP.
@startuml
Box “O-RAN” #lightpink
Participant RIC as “near-RT RIC”
Participant OCUCP as “O-CU-CP”
Participant OCUUP as “O-CU-UP”
Participant OCU as “O-CU”
Participant ODU as “O-DU”
Participant ORU as “O-RU”
end box
@enduml
B.7 3GPP RAN elements as participants
On occasion some use cases may need to show interaction between O-RAN and 3GPP elements. 3GPP defines both LTE and 5G elements. The gNodeB is also defined with a split defining the Centralized Unit (CU) and the Distributed Unit (DU). These participants are in the 3GPPP RAN box with a background of “#Tan”.
@startuml
Box “3GPP RAN” #Tan
Participant eNB
Participant gNB
Participant CU
Participant DU
Endbox
@enduml
B.8 Messaging
Autonumber should be used so that individual messages in a diagram can be easily referenced in conversation. Synchronous calls have an implicit return or the return can be implicitly depicted, often after a long block so as to provide clarity of where processing continues. Some use cases can be used with a start message and end with either a message or response. This is helpful when a common block can be used multiple times.
@startuml
Autonumber
Participant One
Participant Two
[-> One : Use Case incoming message
One -> Two: Synchronous Call
Two ->> One : Asynchronous message
One -> One : Call to Self
Two ->] : Use Case outgoing message
Two --> One : Explicit Synchronous Return
[<-- One : Use Case Return Message
@enduml
B.9 Adding Comments
Comments can be added to the diagram. This is sometimes better than trying to describe the comment in text or for the picture to be able to standalone.
@startuml
Autonumber
Participant One
Participant Two
Note over One
Notes can be used and placed over a lifeline
To describe something happening along that line
End note
[-> One : Use Case incoming message
Rnote over One, Two
Notes can be a simple rectangle instead of the standard
Note above and can be spanning multiple life lines to
Describe the interaction about to occur
endrnote
One -> Two: Synchronous Call
Hnote right One
The can be hexagonal and to the Right
Endhnote
Hnote over One
Over
endhnote
Hnote left One
Or Left of a lifeline
endhnote
Two -> Two :
Note Right : Messages on notes can\nbe used to describe\ninternal processing\nwithout adding to\nparticpant spacing.
Two ->> One : Asynchronous message
Note Left: Message Notes can be\nright or left of the\nmessage but must be\nimmediately after the\nmessage they are noting.
Note over One #fuchsia
Note backgrounds can be **changed** as //well// as the __text__
End note
One -> One : Call to Self
Two ->] : Use Case outgoing message
Two --> One : Explicit Synchronous Return
[<-- One : Use Case Return Message
@enduml
B.10 Participant Creation/Deletion
Sometimes clarity is depicted by showing when a participant is created or first comes into being and likewise when it is destroyed. This is very helpful in understanding timing and existence of a participant. This happens with modifiers to the message.
@startuml
Autonumber
Participant One
Participant Two
[-> One : Use Case incoming message
One -> Two **: Synchronous Call
Two ->> One : Asynchronous message
Two ->] : Use Case outgoing message
Two -> Two !! : Terminate
One -> One : Call to Self
[<-- One : Use Case Return Message
@enduml
B.11 Dividers
In some cases, it is helpful to provide divisions of separate activities of the use case. This can be to define pre-requisite activity such as configuration or subscriptions to an event. It can also be used to depict stages of a lifecycle.
@startuml
Autonumber
Box “Personnel” #lightblue
Actor FT as “Field Technician”
Actor RP as “Radio Planner”
Actor SD as “Service Designer”
End box
Box “Orchestration and Management Platform” #gold
participant SMO as “OAM Functions”
end box
Box “O-Cloud Platform” #lightseagreen
participant OCM as “IMS”
End box
Box “O-RAN” #NavajoWhite
Participant OCU as “O-CU”
end box
Box “3GPP RAN” #Tan
Participant DU
Endbox
== Service Design ==
SD -> SMO : Onboard Service Descriptor
SMO -> OCM : Onboard VNF Descriptor
== Service Deploy ==
RP -> SMO : Deploy Service
== VNF Instantiate ==
SMO -> OCM : Instantiate
OCM -> OCU ** : Create VNF
OCM --> SMO : VNF Created
SMO -> OCU : Configure
== PNF Discovery ==
FT -> DU **: Poweron
DU -> SMO : PNF Register
SMO -> SMO : PNF On Network
SMO -> DU : Configure
== Operate ==
DU <-> OCU : Traffic
@enduml
B.12 Grouping and References
Grouping can be used for many different aspects. In UML there are many types of groups. PlantUML support the basic three. Any of the group types can be nested. “Alt” for conditional processing which can show different path processing rather than just a sunny day scenario. It can also be used to show any logical, as the condition is stated in the swim lane, processing. Sometimes the message and the grouping boundary are close and need some separation. Use the “|||” to create that space.
The “loop” group is used to show iterations or conditional loops. The loop condition is stated on the lines and contain the statements within the loop.
The last kind of group is the fragment. This is a logic group of a sequence of events that go together. The tag line at the top describes the group.
Although references look like groups they cannot be nested. Use the single line version for references to use cases in the current document. The Multi-Line version should be used for reference to use cases in an external document.
@startuml
Box “Orchestration and Management Platform” #gold
participant SMO as “Orchestration”
end box
Box “O-RAN” #NavajoWhite
Participant ODU as “O-DU”
Participant ORU as “O-RU”
end box
Group Configure O-RU associated with O-DU
Alt if flat management model then
Loop for each O-RU managed by the current O-DU
SMO -> ORU : Config (Full_Config)
ref over ORU : Edit-Config <color red>(Internal Document Reference)</color>
Hnote over ORU
Ready
Endhnote
End
|||
Else else if hierarchical model then
SMO -> ODU : Config_RU (Global_Config)
Loop for each O-RU managed by this O-DU instance
ODU -> ODU : Full_Config = Config_Merge (Global_Config, Local_Config)
ODU -> ORU : Config (Full_Config)
ref over ORU
Edit-Config <color red>(External Document Reference)</color>
WG4 M-Plane Specification [12]
End ref
Hnote over ORU
Ready
endhnote
end
|||
Else else must be hybrid model then
Rnote over SMO, ORU
Order of Global and Local Configuration can vary
Endrnote
Loop for each O-RU managed by the current O-DU
SMO -> ORU : Config (Global_Config)
end
Loop for each O-RU managed by this O-DU instance
ODU -> ORU : Config (Local_Config)
end
Alt If both Local_Config and Local_Config Received then
ref over ORU
Edit-Config
WG4 M-Plane Specification [12]
End ref
Hnote over ORU
Ready
endhnote
|||
End
End
end
@enduml
Appendix C: [Informational] Common App Lifecyle Flows
This section provides examples of information flow during various lifecycle activities which are not depicted in other O-RAN Specifications.
C.1 Solution SW Package Lifecycle.
@startuml
skinparam sequenceArrowThickness 2
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
autonumber
Box “Personnel” #lightblue
Actor “Cloud\nNetwork\nApplication\nDeveloper\n(CNAD)” as CNAD
End box
Database “Application\nPackage” as PKG
== PACK ==
Loop foreach <color Blue>ConfigurationManagementDescriptionFile</color>
CNAD -> PKG : Add File to **<color Blue>Package</color>**
Note right CNAD : Update **<color Blue>AppDescriptor.ConfigurationDictionary</color>** with filename and filetype
End loop
Loop foreach **<color Blue>Certificate</color>**
CNAD -> PKG : Add File to **<color Blue>Package</color>**
Note right CNAD : Update **<color Blue>AppDescriptor.SecurityDescriptor.Certificate</color>** with filename
End loop
CNAD -> PKG : Add **<color Blue>App Descriptor</color>**
Loop foreach Component of the App
CNAD -> PKG : Add **<color Blue>DockerImage</color>**
Note right CNAD : Update Component Descriptor with CloudNativeFileNames
Alt if rAPP or xAPP Component then
CNAD -> PKG : Add **<color Blue>RTE Descriptor</color>**
end
Note right CNAD : Update **<color Blue>ComponentDescriptor</color>** with **<color Blue>RTEDescriptorFileName</color>**
CNAD -> PKG : Add **<color Blue>Component Descriptor
end
ALT if ML Enabled
CNAD -> PKG : **<color Blue>ML Model Descriptor(s)</color>**
Alt If Training has been performed then
CNAD-> PKG : Add **<color Blue>ML Training History</color>**
end
End
Loop For each Deployment Option
Loop For each Deployment Module
CNAD -> PKG : add **<color Blue>CloudNative Descriptor</color>**
End
Note right CNAD : Update **<color Blue>Deployment Descriptor</color>** with **<color Blue>CloudNativeFileNames</color>**
CNAD -> PKG : Add **<color Blue>Deployment Descriptor</color>**
end
== SECURE ==
CNAD -> PKG : Add Checksum for artifacts
CNAD -> PKG : Sign Overall Package
@enduml
C.2 Onboarded SW Package Lifecycle.
@startuml
skinparam sequenceArrowThickness 2
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
autonumber
Database “Application\nPackage” as PKG
Box “Personnel” #lightblue
Actor “Cloud\nNative\nApplication\nDeveloper\n(CNAD)” as CNAD
Actor “Service\nDesigner\n(SMO)” as SDO
End box
box “Service Management & \nOrchestration Framework” #gold
Participant “Import\nFunction” as SD
Database “Catalog” as CTLG
end box
== VERIFY ==
SDO -> PKG : Fetch
SDO -> SD : Onboard (**<color Blue>ApplicationPackage</color>**)
SD -> PKG : Authenticate Signature
Alt If Authentication Fails
SD --> SDO : Terminate Processing and Indicate Authentication Failure
SDO -> CNAD : Send Feedback (fix request)
end
SD -> PKG : verify checksums
Alt If Verification Fails
SD --> SDO : Terminate Processing and Indicate File Corruption
SDO -> CNAD : Send Feedback (fix request)
End
SD -> CTLG : Add Package to Catalogue
== UNPACK ==
Group App Descriptor Processing
SD -> PKG : Get **<color Blue>App Descriptor</color>**
Loop foreach **<color Blue>ConfigurationManagementDescriptionFile</color>** in **<color Blue>App Desciptor</color>**
SD -> PKG : Extract File
SD -> CTLG : Add File
Note Right SD : Update for local file names
End loop
Loop foreach **<color Blue>Certificate</color>** in **<color Blue>App Desciptor</color>**
SD -> PKG : Extract File
SD -> CTLG : Add File
Note Right SD : Update for local file names
End loop
Loop foreach **<color Blue>DockerImage</color>** in **<color Blue>App Desciptor</color>**
SD -> PKG : Extract File
SD -> CTLG : Add File
Note Right SD : Update for local file names
End loop
Loop foreach **<color Blue>RTE Descriptor</color>** in **<color Blue>App Desciptor</color>**
SD -> PKG : Extract File
SD -> CTLG : Add File
Note Right SD : Update for local file names
End loop
SD -> CTLG : Catalogue **<color Blue>App Descriptor</color>**
End
Group ML Mode Descriptor Processing
Loop Foreach **<color Blue>ML Model</color>** in **<color Blue>Application Package</color>**
SD -> PKG : **<color Blue>Get ML Model</color>**
SD -> CTLG : Catalogue **<color Blue>ML Model</color>**
End Loop
End
Group Deployment Descriptor Processing
SD -> PKG : Get **<color Blue>DeploymentDescriptor</color>**
Loop Foreach **<color Blue>CloudNativeDescriptorFile in **<color Blue>Application Package</color>**
SD -> PKG : Extract File
SD -> CTLG : Add File
Note Right SD : Update for local file names
End Loop
SD -> CTLG : Catalogue **<color Blue>Deployment Descriptor</color>**
End
SD --> SDO : Success: Package Catalogued.
@enduml
C.3 Onboarded App Descriptor Certification Lifecycle
@startuml
skinparam sequenceArrowThickness 2
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
autonumber
Box “Personnel” #lightblue
Actor “Cloud\nNetwork\nApplication\nDeveloper\n(CNAD)” as CNAD
Actor “Application\nTester\n(SMO)” as SDO
End box
box “Service Management & \nOrchestration Framework” #gold
Participant “Certification\nFunction” as SD
Participant “Service\nPlanning” as SVP
Database “Catalogue” as CTLG
Database “Run Time Library” as RTL
end box
== CERTIFY ==
SDO -> SD : Begin Testing
Loop While Certification In Progress
SD -> SD :
Note Right : Perform Certification Testing
== CATALOG CHANGES ==
Alt If Certification Fails due to Configuration then
SD -> CTLG : Update Configuration Data for next Validation Iteration
Note right SDO #Yellow
<color red> The Initial recommended Configuration From the Package is not defined in the information model </color>
End note
End if
End loop
== PUBLISH ==
Alt If Certification Succeeds then
SD -> CTLG : Fetch App Catalog Data
SD -> RTL : Publish App Catalog Data to Run Time Library
SD -> SDO : Certifaction Complete
Else Certification Failed Due to Defect then
SD --> SDO : Certifaction Failed (defect)
SDO -> CNAD : Feedback (fix requests)
Else Certification Failed Due to Training then
SD -> SVP : Send to AI/ML Training
SD --> SDO : Certifaction Failed (training)
…
SVP -> SD : AI/ML Training Completed
SD -> CTLG : Establish New App Version to be Certified
SD -> CTLG : Update Training Record
Else Other Failure Detected
SD --> SDO : Certifaction Failed (failure)
end
@enduml
C.4 App descriptor Training Lifecycle.
@startuml
skinparam sequenceArrowThickness 2
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
autonumber
box “Service Management & \nOrchestration Framework” #gold
Participant “Service\nPlanning” as SVP
end box
box “Training Provider” #mediumOrchid
Participant “Training Platform” as TP
end box
SVP -> TP : TrainingRequest (ML Models)
Note over SVP,TP
More than one model may need to be trained together
End note
Loop while Training
== GROOM TRAINING DATA ==
TP -> TP :
Note Right : Groom Training Data
Note right TP
Using the **<color Blue>ML Model Descriptor training data requirements</color>** and **<color Blue>
Security requirements</color>** establish the collection of data to create
The training, testing, and validation data sets.
End note
== TRAIN APPLICATION ==
TP -> TP :
Note Right : perform Training iteration
== VALIDATE MODEL ==
TP  -> TP : Update **<color Blue>Training History</color>**
TP -> TP : Compare Metrics to Thresholds
Note right TP
Using the **<color Blue>ML Model Descriptor performance requirements</color>** and
the **<color Blue>validation requirements</color>** determine if the model is sufficiently
trained for operations.
End note
End loop
TP --> SVP : Training Complete
@enduml
C.5 Deploy rAPP Instance Lifecycle.
@startuml
skinparam sequenceArrowThickness 2
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
skinparam sequenceArrowColor green
autonumber
Box “Personnel” #lightblue
Actor “Operations\nPersonnel” as OPS
End box
box “Service Management & \nOrchestration Framework” #gold
Database “Run Time Library” as RTL
Participant “Network\nFunction\nOrchestrator” as NFO
Participant “Network\nFunction\nManager” as NFM
Participant “Non-RT\nRIC” as NrtRIC
Participant “rAPP” as rAPP
end box
Box “O-Cloud Platform” #lightseagreen
participant DMS
End box
Box “O-RAN” #lightpink
Participant “RAN NF” as CNF
end box
OPS –> RTL : Get **<color Blue> Deployment Options</color>**
OPS –> OPS :
Note right
Determine Runtime Variables for each **<color Blue>CloudDescriptor.
This includes the initial rAPP config. Post deployment
the xAPP is configured through the Non-RT RIC via R1.
End note
OPS -> NFO : Deployment Request (selectedOption)
NFO –> RTL : Get **<color Blue>CloudDescriptor</color>** for Selected Option
NFO -> NFO : Decompose and determine sequence
Note over NFO, rAPP
The SMO determines the correct sequence for deploying the rAPPs
End note
Loop for each rAPP to be deployed
NFO-> NFO : Determine homing
Note over NFO, rAPP
The SMO determines on which Non-RT RIC/O-Cloud to deploy this/these xAPP(s).
This can be explicitly identified by the Operations Personnel or via homing policies
End note
Group rAPP Deploy
Loop Foreach **<color Blue>CloudDescriptor</color>**
NFO –> RTL : Get **<color Blue>CloudNativeDescriptor</color>** for **<color Blue>CloudDescriptor</color>**
NFO -> DMS : <<O2>> Create Workload (CloudDescriptor, RuntimeVariables)
DMS -> rAPP ** : create
DMS --> NFO : notify deployment instantiation is completed (DeploymentID)
NFO -> NFO :
Note right
Once complete, SMO updates
its rAPP inventory record with
the Deployment ID from the O-Cloud
End note
End loop
rAPP -> NrtRIC : <<R1>> Register (**<color Blue>RTE Descriptor</color>**)
opt if rAPP is requesting O1 or SMO data then
NrtRIC -> NFM : Request SMO data
NFM -> NFM : Evaluate Request
opt if new NmS data is required then
NFM -> NFM : translate requirements to PM request (new/update)
NFM -> CNF : <<O1>> PM Job Changes
End if
end
End
End loop
NFO --> OPS : rAPP Deployment status (Success)
@enduml
Annex A: SMO and Non-RT RIC mapping with 3GPP management system
This section shows the SMO, Non-RT RIC and the related management interface/service mapping with 3GPP management system.
In [9], 3GPP defines the network management and orchestration architecture for 3GPP networks including network slicing. The management data analytic function (MDAF) is identified as the key function to enable the intelligent management of the network, which provides management data analytics service (MDAS) to both the management functions and the network element. Meanwhile, intent driven management service (IDMS) is under discussion in 3GPP SA5, where the management system could generate intent as the target of the network optimization and automation. The management system should have the capability to consume the service (IDMS) provided by the network. Currently, the two studies are mainly to enable the network management automaton and intelligence. In this sense, it is quite aligned with the motivation of introducing Non-RT RIC in O-RAN.
To better understand the O-RAN OAM architecture, the management services defined in O-RAN, and the relationship with 3GPP and the potential gaps between 3GPP and O-RAN.  Fig. A-1 below tries to do some mapping between the SMO, Non-RT RIC and 3GPP management system and interfaces with the following preliminary analysis.
A1 interface is closely related to the current SA5 3GPP IDMS and MDAS study.
A1-P, as declarative policy is closely related to Intent-NOP discussed in IDMS. Performance target is expected to be provided by management system via the IDMS. But only system level targets are being discussed in the IDMS study. A1-P is finer granularity to enable the UE level, group UE level and even application level automation and optimization.
A1-EI/ML is closely related to the 3GPP MDAS study. MDAS provider is expected to provide data analytics reports and recommendations to the consumers, e.g., CN or RAN leveraging the data analytics and machine learning technologies. AI-EI/ML studied in O-RAN is to enable the enrichment information communication and ML model management towards the RAN. The enrichment information may come from the data analytics based on the historical RAN data collected over O1 interface or from RAN external data sources. In this sense, A1-EI/ML has a larger scope than the MDAS in 3GPP.
O1 interface reflects the 3GPP traditional FCAPS management services.
O2 interface perform the O-Cloud management, the mapping with 3GPP is FFS.
Non-RT RIC could be seen as a MDAF instance, which provides management data analytic service to both internal functions reside in the SMO and external consumers such as near-RT RIC.
The management service, Non-RT RIC and A1 work in O-RAN will continue evolve and the MDAS/IDMS related SI/WI are under study and still in early stage in 3GPP. The gap analysis and mapping relationship will be continuously updated based on the latest progress.
Figure A- 1: SMO and Non-RT RIC mapping with the 3GPP management system
Note:
The figure shows the entire services provided by the SMO Framework, the O-Cloud management and Integration fabric and data service defined by O-RAN so far there is no corresponding services defined in 3GPP.
The Security management service and Accounting management defined in 3GPP so far they are not used in OAM Functions.
The A1 Policy management, A1 EI management, A1 ML management are being studied in O-RAN and being implemented in O-RAN software community.
The A1 Policy management maps to 3GPP IDMS.
A1 EI management and A1 ML management is correlated to the MDAS, when the EI is retrieved from the Data Analytic and AI/ML Model Training, the concrete mapping relationship with 3GPP is FFS.
The Data Analytics and AI/ML Model Training studied in O-RAN maps to 3GPP RAN domain MDAS producer.
Annex ZZZ : O-RAN Adopter License Agreement
BY DOWNLOADING, USING OR OTHERWISE ACCESSING ANY O-RAN SPECIFICATION, ADOPTER AGREES TO THE TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT.
This O-RAN Adopter License Agreement (the “Agreement”) is made by and between the O-RAN Alliance and the entity that downloads, uses or otherwise accesses any O-RAN Specification, including its Affiliates (the “Adopter”).
This is a license agreement for entities who wish to adopt any O-RAN Specification.
Section 1: DEFINITIONS
1.1 “Affiliate” means an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with another entity, so long as such control exists. For the purpose of this Section, “Control” means beneficial ownership of fifty (50%) percent or more of the voting stock or equity in an entity.
1.2 “Compliant Implementation” means any system, device, method or operation (whether implemented in hardware, software or combinations thereof) that fully conforms to a Final Specification.
1.3 “Adopter(s)” means all entities, who are not Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors, including their Affiliates, who wish to download, use or otherwise access O-RAN Specifications.
1.4 “Minor Update” means an update or revision to an O-RAN Specification published by O-RAN Alliance that does not add any significant new features or functionality and remains interoperable with the prior version of an O-RAN Specification. The term “O-RAN Specifications” includes Minor Updates.
1.5 “Necessary Claims” means those claims of all present and future patents and patent applications, other than design patents and design registrations, throughout the world, which (i) are owned or otherwise licensable by a Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor during the term of its Member, Contributor or Academic Contributorship; (ii) such Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor has the right to grant a license without the payment of consideration to a third party; and (iii) are necessarily infringed by a Compliant Implementation (without considering any Contributions not included in the Final Specification). A claim is necessarily infringed only when it is not possible on technical (but not commercial) grounds, taking into account normal technical practice and the state of the art generally available at the date any Final Specification was published by the O-RAN Alliance or the date the patent claim first came into existence, whichever last occurred, to make, sell, lease, otherwise dispose of, repair, use or operate a Compliant Implementation without infringing that claim. For the avoidance of doubt in exceptional cases where a Final Specification can only be implemented by technical solutions, all of which infringe patent claims, all such patent claims shall be considered Necessary Claims.
1.6 “Defensive Suspension” means for the purposes of any license grant pursuant to Section 3, Member, Contributor, Academic Contributor, Adopter, or any of their Affiliates, may have the discretion to include in their license a term allowing the licensor to suspend the license against a licensee who brings a patent infringement suit against the licensing Member, Contributor, Academic Contributor, Adopter, or any of their Affiliates.
Section 2: COPYRIGHT LICENSE
2.1 Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, O-RAN Alliance hereby grants to Adopter a nonexclusive, nontransferable, irrevocable, non-sublicensable, worldwide copyright license to obtain, use and modify O-RAN Specifications, but not to further distribute such O-RAN Specification in any modified or unmodified way, solely in furtherance of implementations of an O-RAN
Specification.
2.2 Adopter shall not use O-RAN Specifications except as expressly set forth in this Agreement or in a separate written agreement with O-RAN Alliance.
Section 3: FRAND LICENSE
3.1 Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors and their Affiliates are prepared to grant based on a separate Patent License Agreement to each Adopter under Fair Reasonable And Non- Discriminatory (FRAND) terms and conditions with or without compensation (royalties) a nonexclusive, non-transferable, irrevocable (but subject to Defensive Suspension), non-sublicensable, worldwide patent license under their Necessary Claims to make, have made, use, import, offer to sell, lease, sell and otherwise distribute Compliant Implementations; provided, however, that such license shall not extend: (a) to any part or function of a product in which a Compliant Implementation is incorporated that is not itself part of the Compliant Implementation; or (b) to any Adopter if that Adopter is not making a reciprocal grant to Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors, as set forth in Section 3.3. For the avoidance of doubt, the foregoing licensing commitment includes the distribution by the Adopter’s distributors and the use by the Adopter’s customers of such licensed Compliant Implementations.
3.2 Notwithstanding the above, if any Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor, Adopter or their Affiliates has reserved the right to charge a FRAND royalty or other fee for its license of Necessary Claims to Adopter, then Adopter is entitled to charge a FRAND royalty or other fee to such Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor, Adopter and its Affiliates for its license of Necessary Claims to its licensees.
3.3 Adopter, on behalf of itself and its Affiliates, shall be prepared to grant based on a separate Patent License Agreement to each Members, Contributors, Academic Contributors, Adopters and their Affiliates under Fair Reasonable And Non-Discriminatory (FRAND) terms and conditions with or without compensation (royalties) a nonexclusive, non-transferable, irrevocable (but subject to Defensive Suspension), non-sublicensable, worldwide patent license under their Necessary Claims to make, have made, use, import, offer to sell, lease, sell and otherwise distribute Compliant Implementations; provided, however, that such license will not extend: (a) to any part or function of a product in which a Compliant Implementation is incorporated that is not itself part of the Compliant Implementation; or (b) to any Members, Contributors, Academic Contributors, Adopters and their Affiliates that is not making a reciprocal grant to Adopter, as set forth in Section 3.1. For the avoidance of doubt, the foregoing licensing commitment includes the distribution by the Members’, Contributors’, Academic Contributors’, Adopters’ and their Affiliates’ distributors and the use by the Members’, Contributors’, Academic Contributors’, Adopters’ and their Affiliates’ customers of such licensed Compliant Implementations.
Section 4: TERM AND TERMINATION
4.1 This Agreement shall remain in force, unless early terminated according to this Section 4.
4.2 O-RAN Alliance on behalf of its Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors may terminate this Agreement if Adopter materially breaches this Agreement and does not cure or is not capable of curing such breach within thirty (30) days after being given notice specifying the breach.
4.3 Sections 1, 3, 5 - 11 of this Agreement shall survive any termination of this Agreement. Under surviving Section 3, after termination of this Agreement, Adopter will continue to grant licenses (a) to entities who become Adopters after the date of termination; and (b) for future versions of O-RAN Specifications that are backwards compatible with the version that was current as of the date of termination.
Section 5: CONFIDENTIALITY
Adopter will use the same care and discretion to avoid disclosure, publication, and dissemination of O-RAN Specifications to third parties, as Adopter employs with its own confidential information, but no less than reasonable care. Any disclosure by Adopter to its Affiliates, contractors and consultants should be subject to an obligation of confidentiality at least as restrictive as those contained in this Section. The foregoing obligation shall not apply to any information which is: (1) rightfully known by Adopter without any limitation on use or disclosure prior to disclosure; (2) publicly available through no fault of Adopter; (3) rightfully received without a duty of confidentiality; (4) disclosed by O-RAN Alliance or a Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor to a third party without a duty of confidentiality on such third party; (5) independently developed by Adopter; (6) disclosed pursuant to the order of a court or other authorized governmental body, or as required by law, provided that Adopter provides reasonable prior written notice to O-RAN Alliance, and cooperates with O-RAN Alliance and/or the applicable Member, Contributor or Academic Contributor to have the opportunity to oppose any such order; or (7) disclosed by Adopter with O-RAN Alliance’s prior written approval.
Section 6: INDEMNIFICATION
Adopter shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the O-RAN Alliance, its Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors, and their employees, and agents and their respective successors, heirs and assigns (the “Indemnitees”), against any liability, damage, loss, or expense (including reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses) incurred by or imposed upon any of the Indemnitees in connection with any claims, suits, investigations, actions, demands or judgments arising out of Adopter’s use of the licensed O-RAN Specifications or Adopter’s commercialization of products that comply with O-RAN Specifications.
Section 7: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY; NO WARRANTY
EXCEPT FOR BREACH OF CONFIDENTIALITY, ADOPTER’S BREACH OF SECTION 3, AND ADOPTER’S INDEMNIFICATION OBLIGATIONS, IN NO EVENT SHALL ANY PARTY BE LIABLE TO ANY OTHER PARTY OR THIRD PARTY FOR ANY INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, PUNITIVE OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES RESULTING FROM ITS PERFORMANCE OR NON-PERFORMANCE UNDER THIS AGREEMENT, IN EACH CASE WHETHER UNDER CONTRACT, TORT, WARRANTY, OR OTHERWISE, AND WHETHER OR NOT SUCH PARTY HAD ADVANCE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. O-RAN SPECIFICATIONS ARE PROVIDED “AS IS” WITH NO WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS WHATSOEVER, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHERWISE. THE O-RAN ALLIANCE AND THE MEMBERS, CONTRIBUTORS OR ACADEMIC CONTRIBUTORS EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION OF MERCHANTABILITY, SECURITY, SATISFACTORY QUALITY, NONINFRINGEMENT, FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ERROR-FREE OPERATION, OR ANY WARRANTY OR CONDITION FOR O-RAN SPECIFICATIONS.
Section 8: ASSIGNMENT
Adopter may not assign the Agreement or any of its rights or obligations under this Agreement or make any grants or other sublicenses to this Agreement, except as expressly authorized hereunder, without having first received the prior, written consent of the O-RAN Alliance, which consent may be withheld in O-RAN Alliance’s sole discretion. O-RAN Alliance may freely assign this Agreement.
Section 9: THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY RIGHTS
Adopter acknowledges and agrees that Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors (including future Members, Contributors and Academic Contributors) are entitled to rights as a third-party beneficiary under this Agreement, including as licensees under Section 3.
Section 10: BINDING ON AFFILIATES
Execution of this Agreement by Adopter in its capacity as a legal entity or association constitutes that legal entity’s or association’s agreement that its Affiliates are likewise bound to the obligations that are applicable to Adopter hereunder and are also entitled to the benefits of the rights of Adopter hereunder.
Section 11: GENERAL
This Agreement is governed by the laws of Germany without regard to its conflict or choice of law provisions.
This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties as to its express subject matter and expressly supersedes and replaces any prior or contemporaneous agreements between the parties, whether written or oral, relating to the subject matter of this Agreement.
Adopter, on behalf of itself and its Affiliates, agrees to comply at all times with all applicable laws, rules and regulations with respect to its and its Affiliates’ performance under this Agreement, including without limitation, export control and antitrust laws. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, Adopter acknowledges that this Agreement prohibits any communication that would violate the antitrust laws.
By execution hereof, no form of any partnership, joint venture or other special relationship is created between Adopter, or O-RAN Alliance or its Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors. Except as expressly set forth in this Agreement, no party is authorized to make any commitment on behalf of Adopter, or O-RAN Alliance or its Members, Contributors or Academic Contributors.
In the event that any provision of this Agreement conflicts with governing law or if any provision is held to be null, void or otherwise ineffective or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, (i) such provisions will be deemed stricken from the contract, and (ii) the remaining terms, provisions, covenants and restrictions of this Agreement will remain in full force and effect.
Any failure by a party or third party beneficiary to insist upon or enforce performance by another party of any of the provisions of this Agreement or to exercise any rights or remedies under this Agreement or otherwise by law shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment to any extent of the other parties’ or third party beneficiary’s right to assert or rely upon any such provision, right or remedy in that or any other instance; rather the same shall be and remain in full force and effect.