Contents
List of figures	5
List of tables	6
Foreword	7
Modal verbs terminology	7
1	Scope	8
2	References	8
2.1 	Normative references	8
2.2 	Informative references	8
3	Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations	9
3.1	Terms	9
3.2	Symbols	10
3.3	Abbreviations	11
4	Study and recommendation for OAuth 2.0	11
4.1 	General Consideration	11
4.2 	IETF 6749	11
4.3 	IETF 8705	11
4.4 	3GPP TS 33.122	11
4.5 	ETSI NFV SEC022	11
5	Threats	11
5.1	Assets	11
5.1.1   	 O-RAN Architecture Elements	12
5.1.2   	 O-RAN interfaces	12
5.2 	Threats Template	12
5.3 	Potential Threat and Exploits	13
5.4 	OAuth 2.0 Threats	13
6	Threat Analysis	14
6.1	 General OAuth 2.0 Threats	14
6.2	 Authorization Server related Threats	21
7	Risk Assessment	24
7.1 	  Security Controls	24
7.2	  OAuth 2.0 Risk Analysis	24
8	Void	37
9	OAuth 2.0 Authorization framework	37
9.1 	Overview	37
9.2	Key Issues	38
9.2.1          Key Issue #1: Registration of O-RAN Architecture Elements in OAuth Authorization Server	38
9.2.2          Key Issue #2: Provisioning of Client ID and secrets to O-RAN Architecture Elements	38
9.2.3          Key Issue #3: Provisioning of Authorization Grants for O-RAN Architecture Elements	39
9.2.4          Key Issue #4: Revocation of Client ID and secrets for O-RAN Architecture Elements	39
9.2.5          Key Issue #5: Revocation of Authorization Grants for O-RAN Architecture Elements	39
9.2.6          Key Issue #6: Secure transfer of client secrets to clients	39
9.2.7          Key Issue #7: Secure transit and storage of access and refresh tokens	39
9.2.8          Key Issue #8: Defining expiration times for access tokens and client secrets	40
9.2.9          Key Issue #9: Consumers based on Client_IDs created with valid administration	40
9.2.10        Key Issue #10: Scope creation	40
9.2.11        Key Issue #11: Need to support RBAC  for the O-RAN resource servers	40
9.2.12        Key Issue #12: Need to support secure transmission	41
9.3	Solutions	41
9.3.1   	  Solution #1: Registration of rApp	41
9.3.2   	  Solution #2: Request access token for R1 services	44
9.3.3   	  Solution #3: R1 services request with access token	47
9.3.4           Solution #4: Secure transmission for client, authorization server and resource server for R1, A1 and O2	50
9.3.5           Solution #5: Support for RBAC	55
9.3.6           Solution #6: Profile for client credentials grant type clients	58
10	Study and recommendation an O-RAN Authorization Server architecture	64
11	Conclusion	64
Annex:Change history/Change request (history)	65
List of figures
Figure 9.1-1 OAuth 2.0 framework for O-RAN Architecture elements and applications	………….24
Figure 9.3.1-1 rApp Registration use case sequence diagram	29
Figure 9.3.2-1 Request access token for R1 services use case sequence diagram 	32
Figure 9.3.3-1 R1 Service request using access token use case sequence diagram	34
Figure 9.3.4-1 Transmission between client and authorization server……………………………………………………37
Figure 9.3.4-2 Transmission between client and resource server…………………………………………………………38
Figure 9.3.4-3 Tls_client_OAuth method………………………………………………………………………….……...39
Figure 9.3.4-4 Private_key_JWT with JWE method………………………………………………………………………39
Figure 9.3.4-5 Private_key_JWT method………………………………………………………………………………….39
Figure 9.3.4-6 Client_secret_JWT method………………………………………………………………………………...40
Figure 9.3.4-7 Client_secret_basic method………………………………………………………………………………..40
Figure 9.3.4-8 Client_secret_post method………………………………………………………………………………....40
Figure 9.3.4-9 Self_signed_tls_client_auth method…………………………………………………….…………………41
Figure 9.3.5-1 RBAC for client credentials……………………………………………………….……………………….43
Figure 9.3.6-1 Profile for confidential client………………………………………………………………………………46
Figure 9.3.7-1 Validation decision of roles and permissions………………………………………………………………47
Figure 9.3.7-2 Roles and permission resolution between the authorization server and resource server…………………...49
List of tables
Table 5.4-1 OAuth2.0 threats………………………………………………………………………………..…………...12
Table 7-2-1 OAuth 2.0 risk analysis………………………………………………………………………………………..23
Table 9.3.1-1 rApp registration use case	28
Table 9.3.2-1 Request access token for R1 services use case	31
Table 9.3.3-1 R1 Service request using access token use case 	….33
Table 9.3.4-1 Use case of secure data transmission between client and authorization server…………………………....36
Table 9.3.4-2 Authentication methods……………………………………………………………………………………38
Table 9.3.4-3 Authentication method preferences..………………………………………………………………………41
Table 9.3.5-1 Use case of RBAC…………………………………………………………………………………….…...42
Table 9.3.6-1 Client credentials grant type client profile………………………………………………………………...44
Table 9.3.7-1 Use case of authorization decision between authorization server and resource server……………………48
Foreword
This Technical Report (TR) has been produced by WG11 of the O-RAN ALLIANCE.
The content of the present document is subject to continuing work within O-RAN and may change following formal O-RAN approval. Should the O-RAN Alliance modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN with an identifying change of version date and an increase in version number as follows:
version xx.yy.zz
where:
xx:	the first digit-group is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have xx=01).  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
yy:	the second digit-group is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
zz:	the third digit-group included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process. External versions never include the third digit-group.  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
Modal verbs terminology
In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the O-RAN Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).
"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in O-RAN deliverables except when used in direct citation.
1	Scope
The technical report defines the authorization framework for O-RAN architecture elements using OAuth 2.0 and applies to the HTTP and Kafka based APIs [i.13] [i.18] used in the R1, O1, O2, A1, FH m-plane [i.17] and Y1 interfaces.
For this objective, the present document
Defines the procedure flow for token registration process, token request process, token verification process and token authorization process. It will specify the token scope metadata for O-RAN.
Analyses the existing specifications related to OAuth 2.0 such as O-RAN Security protocol specification, IETF RFC 8705 [i.6], IETF RFC 6749 [i.5], 3GPP TS29.501 [i.3], 3GPP TS 33.122 [i.4], 3GPP TS 28.319 [i.19] and ETSI NFV SEC-022 [i.7]. This is used as input to the present document.
Analyses the security threat arising from the misuse of the access token and defines the security requirements associated to access token.
Provides the study and recommendation of an authorization server architecture to overlay on the O-RAN architecture.
2	References
2.1 	Normative references
Not applicable.
2.2 	Informative references
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. In the case of a reference to a 3GPP document, a non-specific reference implicitly refers to the latest version of that document in Release 18 or the latest 3GPP release prior to Release 18 that includes that document.
NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, O-RAN cannot guarantee their long term validity.
The following referenced documents are not necessary for the application of the present document but they assist the user with regard to a particular subject area.
[i.1] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: “O-RAN Security Protocols Specification”
[i.2] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: “O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls Specification”
[i.3] 3GPP TS 29.501:"5G System; Network Function Repository Services"
[i.4] 3GPP TS 33.122:"Security aspects of Common API Framework (CAPIF) for 3GPP northbound APIs"
[i.5] IETF RFC 6749: "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework"
[i.6] IETF RFC 8705: "OAuth 2.0 Mutual-TLS Client Authentication and Certificate-Bound Access Tokens"
[i.7] ETSI GS NFV-SEC 022: "Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV) Release 2; Security; Access Token
Specification for API Access"
[i.8] IETF RFC 6819: “OAuth 2.0 Threat Model and Security Considerations”
[i.9] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: “O-RAN Architecture Description”
[i.10]3GPP TS 23.222: "Common API Framework for 3GPP Northbound APIs"
[i.11]3GPP TS 29.222: "Common API Framework for 3GPP Northbound APIs"
[i.12] IETF RFC 2616: “Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1”
[i.13]   O-RAN TS: "R1 interface: General Aspects and Principles" ("R1GAP")
[i.14]   O-RAN TS: " Non-RT RIC & A1/R1 Interface: Use Cases and Requirements” ("UCR")
[i.15] O-RAN TR: “Decoupled SMO”
[i.16] O-RAN TR: “SMO Security”
[i.17] O-RAN TS: “Management Plane Specification”
[i.18] Kafka Documentation https://kafka.apache.org/documentation.html
[i.19] 3GPP TS 29.319: " Management and orchestration; Access control for management services"
[i.20] O-RAN ALLIANCE TR: "O-RAN Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment"
[i.21] Final: OpenID Connect Core 1.0 incorporating errata set 2
[i.22] IETF RFC 7591: OAuth 2.0 Dynamic Client Registration Protocol
[i.23] IETF RFC 8414: OAuth 2.0 Authorization Server Metadata
[i.24] ITU-T M.3050: https://www.kornev-online.net/ITIL/T-REC-M.3050-200405-I!Sup3!PDF-E.pdf
[i.25] Coarse-Grained vs Fine-Grained Authorization: Which to Use?
3	Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations
3.1	Terms
For the purposes of the present document, the following terms apply:
A1: Interface between non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC to enable policy-driven guidance of Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.
Access Token: credentials used to obtain access. It is a string, usually opaque to the client, representing an authorization issued to the client. Tokens represent specific scopes and durations of access, granted by the resource owner, and enforced by the resource server and authorization server (see [i.5], clause 1.4).
Authorization code: The authorization code is obtained by using an authorization server as an intermediary between the client and resource owner.  Instead of requesting authorization directly from the resource owner, the client directs the resource owner to an authorization server (via its user-agent as defined in [IETF RFC 2616]), which in turn directs the resource owner back to the client with the authorization code. ([i.5], clause 1.3.1)
Authorization Server: The server issuing access tokens to the client after successfully authenticating the resource owner and obtaining authorization. ([i.5], clause 1.1)
Client: An application making protected resource requests on behalf of the resource owner and with its authorization. The term "client" does not imply any particular implementation characteristics (e.g., whether the application executes on a server, a desktop, or other devices). ([i.5], clause 1.1)
Client Credentials: The client credentials (or other forms of client authentication) can be used as an authorization grant when the authorization scope is limited to the protected resources under the control of the client, or to protected resources previously arranged with the authorization server.  Client credentials are used as an authorization grant typically when the client is acting on its own behalf (the client is also the resource owner) or is requesting access to protected resources based on an authorization previously arranged with the authorization server. ([i.5], clause 1.3.4)
Coarse-grained authorization (CGA): uses one attribute (like user roles), making access control simple for smaller setups (see [i.25]).
Confidential client:  A client capable of maintaining the confidentiality of their credentials (e.g., client implemented on a secure server with restricted access to the client credentials), or capable of secure client authentication using other means as in clause 2.2 of [i.5].
CSRF: Cross-site request forgery (CSRF) is a web-based attack whereby HTTP requests are transmitted from a user that the web site trusts or has authenticated (e.g., via HTTP redirects or HTML forms). ([i.8], clause 4.4.1.8)
Fine-grained authorization (FGA): uses a combination of detailed attributes, offering precise control for larger, intricate environments (see [i.25]).
Near-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller: An O-RAN Network Function (NF) that enables near-real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources via fine-grained data collection and actions over E2 interface. It may include AI/ML (Artificial Intelligence / Machine Learning) workflow including model training, inference and updates.
Non-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller: A functionality within SMO that drives the content carried across the A1 interface.  It is comprised of the Non-RT RIC Framework and the Non-RT RIC Applications (rApps) whose services are defined below.
Non-RT RIC Applications (rApps): Modular applications that leverage the functionality exposed via the Non-RT RIC Framework’s R1 interface to provide added value services relative to RAN operation, such as driving the A1 interface, recommending values and actions that may be subsequently applied over the O1/O2 interface and generating “enrichment information” for the use of other rApps.  The rApp functionality within the Non-RT RIC enables non-real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources and policy-based guidance to the applications/features in Near-RT RIC.
O2: Interface between SMO framework as specified in clause 5.3.1 and the O-Cloud for supporting O-RAN virtual network functions. Please refer to [i.9] for more information.
Open Redirector: An open redirector is an endpoint using a parameter to automatically redirect a user-agent to the location specified by the parameter value without any validation. ([i.5], clause 10.15)
R1 Interface: Interface between rApps and Non-RT RIC Framework via which R1 Services can be produced and consumed.
Refresh token: Refresh tokens are credentials used to obtain access tokens.  Refresh tokens are issued to the client by the authorization server and are used to obtain a new access token when the current access token becomes invalid or expires, or to obtain additional access tokens with identical or narrower scope (access tokens may have a shorter lifetime and fewer permissions than authorized by the resource owner). ([i.5], clause 1.5)
Resource Owner: An entity capable of granting access to a protected resource. When the resource owner is a person, it is referred to as an end-user. ([i.5], clause 1.1)
Resource Server: The server hosting the protected resources, capable of accepting and responding to protected resource requests using access tokens. ([i.5], clause 1.1)
SMO: A Service Management and Orchestration framework.
User-Agent: The User-Agent request-header field contains information about the user agent originating the request. This is for statistical purposes, the tracing of protocol violations, and automated recognition of user agents for the sake of tailoring responses to avoid particular user agent limitations. ([i.12], clause 14.43)
xApp: An application designed to run on the Near-RT RIC. Such an application is likely to consist of one or more microservices and at the point of on-boarding will identify which data it consumes and which data it provides. The application is independent of the Near-RT RIC and may be provided by any third party. The E2 enables a direct association between the xApp and the RAN functionality.
Y1: An interface over which RAN analytics services are exposed by the Near-RT RIC to be consumed by Y1 consumers.
3.2	Symbols
Void
3.3	Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the following abbreviations apply:
3GPP	3rd Generation Partnership Project
Near-RT RIC          Near-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller
rApp	Non-RT RIC Application
SMO	Service Management and Orchestration
xApp	Near-RT RIC Application
4	Study and recommendation for OAuth 2.0
4.1 	General Consideration
This Technical Report makes the following considerations:
O-RAN Alliance WG1 has identified the key functions and interfaces [i.9] adopted in O-RAN and this will influence the set of assets to be protected for OAuth 2.0 framework.
This TR will perform a detailed study of the OAuth 2.0 authorization server for O-RAN architecture elements and interfaces.
Clause 4.7 in O-RAN Security Protocol Security specification [i.1] will be considered as the baseline text for the OAuth 2.0 framework.
The recommended security requirements and controls provided in this report will be shared with the impacted O-RAN Alliance working group, such as WG1, WG2, WG3, WG6 and WG10 prior publishing them as normative.
4.2 	IETF 6749
Editor’s note: This clause will do the study related to OAuth 2.0 framework from IETF RFC 6749
4.3 	IETF 8705
Editor’s note: This clause will do the study related to OAuth 2.0 Mutual-TLS Client Authentication and Certificate-Bound Access Tokens from IETF RFC 8705
4.4 	3GPP TS 33.122
Editor’s note: This clause will do the study related to OAuth 2.0 recommended from 3GPP specification (23.222, 29.222, 33.122, TS29.501)
4.5 	ETSI NFV SEC022
Editor’s note: This clause will do the study related to OAuth 2.0 mechanism and definition from ETSI NFV SEC022
5	Threats
5.1	Assets
The following O-RAN architecture elements and interfaces should be considered for the security threat analysis:
5.1.1   	 O-RAN Architecture Elements
ASSET-C-01: Service Management and Orchestration (SMO)
ASSET-C-02: Near-RT RIC software
ASSET-C-07: O-eNB
ASSET-C-08: O-Cloud
ASSET-C-09: xApps
ASSET-C-10: rApps
ASSET-C-11: Non-RT RIC
ASSET-C-32: O-RU
ASSET-C-34: O-DU
ASSET-C-36: O-CU Host, includes O-CU-CP and O-CU-UP software
5.1.2   	 O-RAN interfaces
ASSET-C-14: A1 interface
ASSET-C-16: R1 interface
ASSET-C-23: O2 interface
ASSET-C-42: Y1 interface
ASSET-C-63: Near RT RIC API’s
5.2 	Threats Template
Template to present the threat characteristics:
5.3 	Potential Threat and Exploits
5.4 	OAuth 2.0 Threats
The following threats to OAuth 2.0 have been identified and are analyzed in clause 6 Threat Analysis.
Table 5.4-1 – OAuth 2.0 threats
NOTE: In above table 5.4-1, access control related threats are defined in [i.20]
6	Threat Analysis
6.1	 General OAuth 2.0 Threats
6.2	 Authorization Server related Threats
7	Risk Assessment
7.1 			Security Controls
The following security controls should be considered for the security threat and risk analysis:
Control-1: OAuth 2.0
Control-2: IAM (using RBAC)
Control-3: Certificate Management
Control-4: Encryption for Data at Rest
Control-5: Encryption for Data in Motion (eg., TLS)
7.2			OAuth 2.0 Risk Analysis
This clause provides risk assessment tables for each of the identified assets.  These tables list the assets, threats, impacts, and possible security controls. The following risk assessment matrix is used to assess the risk score as defined in [i.20].
Table 7-2-1 OAuth 2.0 risk analysis
8	Void
The following security controls should be considered for the security threat and risk analysis:
Control-1: OAuth 2.0
Control-2: IAM (using RBAC)
Control-3: Certificate Management
Control-4: Encryption for Data at Rest
Control-5: Encryption for Data in Motion
9	OAuth 2.0 Authorization framework
9.1 	Overview
Figure 9.1-1 depicts the basic OAuth 2.0 framework for O-RAN architecture elements and applications. This general authorization framework is generalized from clause 1 of IETF RFC 6749 [i.5].
Figure 9.1-1 OAuth 2.0 framework for O-RAN architecture elements and applications
O-RAN OAuth 2.0 framework defines four roles from clause 1 of IETF RFC 6749 [i.5]:
O-RAN client: An O-RAN client is an O-RAN architecture element or application like an rApp or xApp acting as an OAuth client.
Authorization server: The server issuing access tokens to the O-RAN client after successfully authenticating the resource owner and obtaining authorization.
Resource owner: “An entity capable of granting access to a protected resource. When the resource owner is a person, it is referred to as an end-user.” ([i.5], clause 1.1)
Resource server: “The server hosting the protected resources, capable of accepting and responding to protected resource requests using access tokens.” ([i.5], clause 1.1)
9.2	Key Issues
9.2.1          Key Issue #1: Registration of O-RAN Architecture Elements in OAuth Authorization Server
9.2.1.1         Key issue detail
This key issue addresses the security threats during the registration of O-RAN client (e.g., xApp, rApp) in the
authorization server.
9.2.1.2         Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-05, T-OAuth-G-06, T-OAuth-G-12 as defined in
clause 6.1.
9.2.2          Key Issue #2: Provisioning of Client ID and secrets to O-RAN Architecture Elements
9.2.2.1         Key issue detail
This key issue addresses the security threats while provisioning the client ID and secerets for O-RAN client
(e.g., xApp, rApp).
9.2.2.2         Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-01, T-OAuth-G-03, T-OAuth-G-04, T-OAuth-G-05,
T-OAuth-G-09, T-OAuth-G-18, T-OAuth-G-19, T-OAuth-G-20, T-OAuth-G-21, T-OAuth-AS-10 as defined
in clause 6.1 and clause 6.2.
9.2.3          Key Issue #3: Provisioning of Authorization Grants for O-RAN Architecture Elements
9.2.3.1         Key issue detail
This key issue addresses the security threats while provisioning the authorization grants for O-RAN client
(e.g., xApp, rApp).
9.2.3.2         Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-08, T-OAuth-G-10, T-OAuth-G-11, T-OAuth-G-13
as defined in clause 6.1.
9.2.4          Key Issue #4: Revocation of Client ID and secrets for O-RAN Architecture Elements
9.2.4.1         Key issue detail
This key issue addresses the security threats related to revocation of client ID and secrets for O-RAN client
(e.g., xApp, rApp).
9.2.4.2         Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-02, T-OAuth-G-14, T-OAuth-G-15, T-OAuth-G-17,
T-OAuth-AS-11 as defined in clause 6.1 and clause 6.2.
9.2.5          Key Issue #5: Revocation of Authorization Grants for O-RAN Architecture Elements
9.2.5.1         Key issue detail
This key issue addresses the security threats related to revocation of authorization grants for O-RAN client
(e.g., xApp, rApp).
9.2.5.2         Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-10, T-OAuth-AS-04, T-OAuth-AS-07 as defined in
clause 6.1 and clause 6.2.
9.2.6          Key Issue #6: Secure transfer of client secrets to clients
9.2.6.1         Key issue detail
The need is to identify,
How are the client secrets transferred to potential clients?
Whether the client secrets will be known at development time or runtime?
9.2.6.2         Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-01, T-OAuth-G-05, T-OAuth-G-12,
T-OAuth-AS-01, T-OAuth-AS-03 as defined in clause 6.1 and clause 6.2.
9.2.7          Key Issue #7: Secure transit and storage of access and refresh tokens
9.2.7.1         Key issue detail
It needs to be identified what possible mechanisms exists to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of access
and refresh tokens.
9.2.7.2         Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-02, T-OAuth-G-03, T-OAuth-G-04, T-OAuth-G-20,
T-OAuth-G-15, T-OAuth-G-16, T-OAuth-G-18 as defined in clause 6.1.
9.2.8          Key Issue #8: Defining expiration times for access tokens and client secrets
9.2.8.1       Key issue detail
It needs to be identified if
Access tokens need to be configured with the minimal expiration time and in what use cases
Client secrets need to be revoked and refreshed regularly and if so at what intervals
9.2.8.2       Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-10, T-OAuth-AS-01, T-OAuth-AS-02, T-OAuth-AS-03 as defined in clause 6.1 and clause 6.2.
9.2.9          Key Issue #9: Consumers based on Client_IDs created with valid administration
9.2.9.1         Key issue detail
It needs to be identified if
Consumers who connect are only those validated by administrators
Dynamic clients are possible or not
9.2.9.2        Security threats
The threat related to the above key issue is T-OAuth-G-11 as defined in clause 6.1.
9.2.10        Key Issue #10: Scope creation
9.2.10.1       Key issue detail
It needs to be checked as to how scopes are designed, provisioned and enforced. Key topics are
How scopes are designed by the resource servers including the clearance and access levels
How scopes are transferred the authorization server
How scopes are requested by the client
How scopes are created in the authorization server
9.2.10.2       Security threats
The threats related to the above key issue are T-OAuth-G-11, T-OAuth-G-13 as defined in clause 6.1.
9.2.11        Key Issue #11: Need to support RBAC  for the O-RAN resource servers
The O-RAN resource servers need to be accessed by only those users who are authorized to carry out the
specific task. Hence, we need a mechanism to design and map the O-RAN resource server to the users for
access control.
9.2.11.1        Key issue detail
It needs to be checked as to
How to limit the access of resources to specified users (least privilege) and only for the intended task.
How to manage access (assign users to permissions related to the resource servers) in a fast and efficient manner.
How to retain a role only for the period of time required and no longer.
9.2.11.2      Security threats
The threats related to limited access control are below.
Malicious attacks with open access to the entire system of assets and data
Insider threats
Privilege stagnation over a period of time
Editor notes: Some of the threats id’s such as T-O-RAN-03,T-O-RAN-06,T-R1-01,T-R1-05,T-AppLCM-04,T-GEN-02,T-SMO-10 in clause 5.4 of the present document are mapped  and identified in the O-RAN Threat Modelling and Remediation Analysis document [i.20], need to be discussed further.
9.2.12        Key Issue #12: Need to support secure transmission
The key issues address the need to support for secure transmission of request and response between client and authorization server, between client and resource server.
The O-RAN related HTTP client (e.g.: R1, A1, O2) need to make a request to the authorization server and receive a response with respect to the access token. After that the access token has to be transferred from the client to the resource server.
9.2.12.1        Key issue detail
It needs to be checked as to
How the client will send request details including credentials related to client_id and client _secret to the authorization server
How the client will receive the response from the authorization server
How the client will send the access token to the resource server
9.2.12.2       Security threats
The threats related to insecure transmission of request and response are T-OAuth-G-01, T-OAuth-G-03,
T-OAuth-G-05 as defined in clause 6.1.
9.3	Solutions
9.3.1   			Solution #1: Registration of rApp
9.3.1.1          Background
This use case allows an rApp to register to the SMO as specified in R1GAP [i.13] [i.14]. The registration procedure is specified as part of Service Management and Exposure services in R1GAP [i.13] [i.14].
9.3.1.2          Solution Description
Table 9.3.1-1 rApp Registration use case
@startuml
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
skinparam defaultFontSize 12
skinparam lifelineStrategy solid
autonumber
box “ SMO “ #cadetBlue
participant  "rApp Management SMOS"  as rApp_M
participant  “SME(SMOS)”  as SME
rApp_M -> SME:App Manager sends a registration request \n to the SME service based on endpoint details \n and passing relevant information needed
SME->SME :
note right
Registration processing
assign  rAppid using
Authorization service
end note
SME -> rApp_M :Response to the registration request (rAppid)
Note Over rApp_M
rApp Management assign
rAppid to rApp as per
App LCM process
end note
endbox
@enduml
Figure 9.3.1-1 rApp Registration use case sequence diagram
9.3.1.3	      Impacts on Existing O-RAN Architecture Elements and Interfaces
R1 interface, rApp and SME are the O-RAN architecture elements and interfaces involved in the proposed use cases as specified in Decoupled SMO [i.15] [i.16].
1)	Service Management and Exposure (SME) SMOS
The SME service is introduced in the [i.8] clause 3.1. While the SME was initially targeted for management and exposure of rApp services in the [i.8], its services are applicable to any entities within the SMO that fulfil the roles of Service Producer and/or Service Consumer.
In a decomposed service-based SMO architecture, the SME can be leveraged as a generic SMOS, handling service management and exposure for any SMOSs within SMO. The SME SMOS provides a set of common SMO capabilities that are needed for all SMO Services.
Several of the SME services are applicable to any SMOSs:
SMOS registration,
SMOS discovery,
Authentication and authorization to access a SMOS,
Communication support between SMOS Service Producers and SMOS Service Consumers (SMOS Communication),
Bootstrap of new SMOSs (optional),
Heartbeat of SMOSs (optional).
rApp Management (SMOS)
The rApp management service handles management aspects specific to rApps such as:
rApp Configuration Management (CM): enables management of the rApp configuration settings,
rApp Performance Management (PM): offers support for performance reporting on an rApp performance, or of the rApp communication with the non-RT RIC framework (rApp usage of R1 interface),
rApp Fault Management (FM): provides the fault reporting capabilities to rApps, so they can consume it to report faults that are related to the rApp, or to the rApp communication with the non-RT RIC framework (rApp usage of R1 interface),
rApp Logging Information: enables rApps to convey their logging information to the non-RT RIC framework,
rApp lifecycle management services, that expose services that allow to trigger rApp software lifecycle management.
9.3.1.4	        Solution Evaluation
Key Issue #1: Registration of O-RAN architecture elements in OAuth authorization server
9.3.1.5	        Potential Security Recommendations
OAuth protection of the R1 interface is already mandatory in the O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls Specifications [i.2] SEC-CTL-R1-3.
9.3.2   			Solution #2: Request access token for R1 services
9.3.2.1          Background
This use case allows an rApp to request an access token for access to R1 services as specified in R1GAP [i.13] [i.14]. The request access procedure is specified as part of Service Management and Exposure services in R1GAP [i.13] [i.14].
An rApp in the role of Service Consumer will be able to request the token and once the token is available, the rApp in the role of Service Consumer will be able access the R1 Services for which it has been authorized.
9.3.2.2	        Solution Description
Table 9.3.2-1 Request access token for R1 services use case
@startuml
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
skinparam defaultFontSize 12
skinparam lifelineStrategy solid
autonumber
box "non-RT RIC" #whitesmoke
box #ivory
participant rApp as rApp
endbox
box "SMO" #cadetBlue
participant “SME (SMOS)"   as SME
endbox
rApp -> SME: <<R1>> Access token request (rAppId)
SME->SME:
note right
Check Authorization
(Authenticate the rApp and
check if authorized, if
rApp is authorized,
generate an access token)
end note
SME -> rApp :<<R1>> Access token response (access token)
@enduml
Figure 9.3.2-1 Request access token for R1 services use case sequence diagram
9.3.2.3	        Impacts on Existing O-RAN Architecture Elements and Interfaces
R1 interface, rApp and SME are the O-RAN architecture elements and interfaces involved in the proposed use cases as specified in Decoupled SMO [i.15] [i.16].
1)	Service Management and Exposure (SME) SMOS
The SME service is introduced in the [i.8] clause 3.1. While the SME was initially targeted for management and exposure of rApp services in the [i.8], its services are applicable to any entities within the SMO that fulfil the roles of Service Producer and/or Service Consumer.
In a decomposed service-based SMO architecture, the SME can be leveraged as a generic SMOS, handling service management and exposure for any SMOSs within SMO. The SME SMOS provides a set of common SMO capabilities that are needed for all SMO Services. Several of the SME services are applicable to any SMOSs:
SMOS registration,
SMOS discovery,
Authentication and authorization to access a SMOS,
Communication support between SMOS Service Producers and SMOS Service Consumers (SMOS Communication),
Bootstrap of new SMOSs (optional),
Heartbeat of SMOSs (optional).
2) SME functions in the role of SME services Producer
supports the functionality of OAuth 2.0 authorization server,
support authentication and authorization of an rApp to determine which R1 services an rApp can access,
provide response of success or failure to access token request.
rApp
supports initiating the procedure to request access token,
supports initiating service request with the available access token.
9.3.2.4	        Solution Evaluation
Key Issue #3: Provisioning of Authorization Grants for R1 services
9.3.2.5	        Potential Security Recommendation
Use OAuth 2.0, as specified in O-RAN Security Protocols Specifications [i.1], clause 4.7 to implement authorization in the R1 interface.
Enable rApp to request OAuth 2.0 access tokens for R1 services.
Enable the SME to act as both an OAuth 2.0 resource and an OAuth 2.0 authorization server.
9.3.3   			Solution #3: R1 services request with access token
9.3.3.1          Background
This use case discusses R1 service Producer to verify that rApp is authorized to access the R1 service as specified in R1GAP [i.13] [i.14]. The service request procedure is specified as part of Service Management and Exposure services in R1GAP [i.13][i.14].
9.3.3.2	        Solution Description
Table 9.3.3-1 R1 Service request using access token use case
@startuml
!pragma teoz true
skinparam ParticipantPadding 5
skinparam BoxPadding 10
skinparam defaultFontSize 12
skinparam lifelineStrategy solid
autonumber
box #whitesmoke
box #ivory
participant rApp as rApp
endbox
box "SMO" #cadetBlue
participant “ SME "   as SME
participant “ R1 service Producer m"   as SP
endbox
rApp ->SP: <<R1>> Service request (access token)
SP->SP
note right
Validate token
(Verify integrity and claims
in the access token.
If successful, execute
the requested service).
end note
alt
SP->SP: Valid Token
SP -> rApp :<<R1>> Service response (success)
SP->SP: Invalid or Expired Token
SP -> rApp :<<R1>> Service response (failure)
end ref
@enduml
Figure 9.3.3-1 R1 Service request using access token use case sequence diagram
9.3.3.3	        Impacts on Existing O-RAN Architecture Elements and Interfaces
R1 interface, rApp and SME are the O-RAN architecture elements and interfaces involved in the proposed use cases as specified in Decoupled SMO [i.15] [i.16].
1)	Service Management and Exposure (SME) SMOS
The SME service is introduced in the [i.13] clause 3.1. While the SME was initially targeted for management and exposure of rApp services in the [i.13], its services are applicable to any entities within the SMO that fulfil the roles of Service Producer and/or Service Consumer.
In a decomposed service-based SMO architecture, the SME can be leveraged as a generic SMOS, handling service management and exposure for any SMOSs within SMO. The SME SMOS provides a set of common SMO capabilities that are needed for all SMO Services.
Several of the SME services are applicable to any SMOSs:
SMOS registration,
SMOS discovery,
Authentication and authorization to access a SMOS,
Communication support between SMOS Service Producers and SMOS Service Consumers (SMOS Communication),
Bootstrap of new SMOSs (optional),
Heartbeat of SMOSs (optional).
SME in the role of SME services Producer
supports the functionality of OAuth 2.0 authorization server,
support authentication and authorization of an rApp to determine which R1 services an rApp can access,
provide response of success or failure to access token request
rApp
initiating the procedure to request access token,
initiating service request with the available access token.
R1 Service Producer
provider of an R1 service.
9.3.3.4          Solution Evaluation
Key issue #6: Provisioning of service access based on access token
9.3.3.5          Potential Security Recommendations
Use OAuth 2.0, as specified in O-RAN Security Protocols Specifications [i.1], clause 4.7 to implement authorization in the R1 interface.
Enable the SME to act as both an OAuth 2.0 resource and an OAuth 2.0 authorization server.
9.3.4           Solution #4: Secure transmission for client, authorization server and resource server for R1, A1 and O2
9.3.4.1         Background
This solution elaborates on the possibilities to ensure that data for the below flows is secure transmission of request and response between client to authorization server, between client and resource server for R1, A1 and O2.,
Between client and authorization server
The client needs to send the credentials and the authorization request details which need to be secured during transmission.
Between client and resource server
The client needs to send the access token to the authentic resource server which needs to be secured during transmission.
9.3.4.2         Solution Description
Table 9.3.4-1 use case of secure data transmission between client and authorization server
@startuml
hide footbox
skinparam sequenceActorBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceActorBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceParticipantBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceParticipantBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceArrowColor Black
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBorderColor Black
skinparam shadowing false
skinparam NoteBackgroundColor White
skinparam NoteBorderColor Black
Title Secure transmission between client and authorization server
Actor "client" as client
participant "OAuth Authorization Server" as AS
client -> AS:authenticate with client_id and client_secret
client -> AS:send authorization Request
AS -> client: send access token
@enduml
Figure 9.3.4-1 Transmission between client and authorization server
@startuml
hide footbox
skinparam sequenceActorBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceActorBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceParticipantBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceParticipantBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceArrowColor Black
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBorderColor Black
skinparam shadowing false
skinparam NoteBackgroundColor White
skinparam NoteBorderColor Black
Title Secure transmission between client and resource server
Actor "client" as client
participant "resource server" as RS
client <-> RS:mutual authentication
client -> RS:send access token as part of API operation
@enduml
Figure 9.3.4-2 Transmission between client and resource server
9.3.4.2.1       Authentication methods between client, authorization server and resource server
The solutions below are various options to transfer the information securely between the O-RAN OAuth clients and the various servers in the interaction including the authorization server and the various O-RAN resource servers. Below is a summary:
Table 9.3.4-2 Authentication methods
Below are the details of the methods explained above
Tls_client_auth
Part of RFC 8705.
Mutual authentication of both client and server. Here certificates are issued by a certificate authority. Also supports token binding.
For certificate bound access tokens every party proves that they are in possession of their private key.
Who is in possession of the private key used to establish the connection can use the access token (puts the hash of the certificate (cnf) that has been used).
Figure 9.3.4-3 - Tls_client_OAuth method
Private_key_JWT (with JWE)
Part of OpenID foundation specification.
Public and private key is used to sign and encrypt the JWT token using asymmetric cryptography.
Contents of the message cannot be seen as they are encrypted.
Figure 9.3.4-4 Private_key_JWT with JWE method
Private_key_JWT
Part of OpenID foundation specification
The client_id and client_secret is part of the JWT token which is integrity protected. The JWT is a string which is attached as a client assertion. Here we AVOID putting the secret in message, instead in the JWT token.
Confidential client create JSON Web Token along with the public and private key. Hence structure of the JWT isthe header, body and the Signature. Hence JWS client has the private key and shares the public key to the authorization server for validation of the request. Hence the contents of the message can be seen but secure from manipulation.
Figure 9.3.4-5 Private_key_JWT method
Client_secret_JWT
Part of OpenID foundation specification.
Client_secret_JWT - client_id and client_secret in the JWT token which is integrity protected with a shared secret key (client_secret known to both parties) using HMAC. The JWT is a string which is attached as a client assertion. Here we AVOID putting the secret in message. Instead in the JWT token which is with a MAC (hash function+Secret).
Figure 9.3.4-6 Client_secret_JWT method
Client_secret_basic
client_id and client_secret in the header of the message.
Defined in RFC 7591.
Figure 9.3.4-7 Client_secret_basic method
Client_secret_post
client_id and client_secret in the body of the message.
Defined in RFC 7591.
Figure 9.3.4-8 Client_secret_post method
Self_signed_tls_client_auth
RFC 8705.
Mutual authentication using self signed certificates. Here certificate is created by self signing.
Figure 9.3.4-9 Self_signed_tls_client_auth method
9.3.4.3	        Impacts on Existing O-RAN Architecture Elements and Interfaces
R1 client, A1 client and the O2 client needs to choose the authentication method from the options explained above depending on the client and authorization server capabilities:
9.3.4.4	        Solution Evaluation
There is a need to support secure transmission of request and response between client and authorization server, between client to resource server. Below is the order of preference of various methods explained above in the order of most preferred to least preferred depending on the authorization server capabilities as well as the security level preferred.
Table 9.3.4-3 Authentication method preferences
9.3.4.5	        Potential Security Recommendations
Editor’s note: The security recommendation will be left for future study.
9.3.5           Solution #5: Support for RBAC
9.3.5.1         Background
Role based access control is an important concept for the authorization mechanism in O-RAN to support either coarse grained or fine-grained access.
The protected resources expose various operations which can be protected by access rules are mapped to different roles in an operator setup. An operator should assign roles to users (human and non-human) using identity management workflows.
This solution elaborates on the possibilities to
Explain the association between the users, roles and the access rules (permissions) as defined in [i.19] clause 7.
NOTE: the reference of the 3GPP specification in [i.19] can be considered as an example and customised for the O-RAN interfaces.
9.3.5.2          Solution Description
Table 9.3.5-1 use case of RBAC
@startuml
hide footbox
skinparam sequenceActorBackgroundColor Whiteskinparam sequenceActorBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceParticipantBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceParticipantBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceArrowColor Black
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBorderColor Black
skinparam shadowing false
skinparam NoteBackgroundColor White
skinparam NoteBorderColor Black
Actor "Admin Resource server" as AR
Actor "Admin"
participant "Authorization Server" as AS
group Design of permissions \n(resources and operations)
AR-> AR: 1: Design coarse grained and fine grained permissions
AR-> Admin: 2: Express the permissions of a resource server
end
group Provisioning of RBAC model data
Admin -> AS: 3: Deploy permissions
Admin -> AS: 4: Deploy roles
Admin -> AS: 5: Deploy client_ID and its Client_secret
end
@enduml
Figure 9.3.5-1 RBAC for client credentials
9.3.5.3	        Impacts on Existing O-RAN Architecture Elements and Interfaces
The O-RAN interfaces should factor in the permissions which should be used in the context of scope in the OAuth flows.
The keyword scope is used both in an OAuth access token as well as in the OpenAPI to define what a particular interface is allowed to do.
9.3.5.4	        Solution Evaluation
Permissions have to be considered by all the O-RAN APIs,
For the OpenAPIs this should be expressed as scopes,
The semantics of the permissions which should be evaluated and validated by the resource server need to be defined.
9.3.5.5	         Potential Security Recommendations
Editor’s note: The security recommendation will be left for future study.
9.3.6           Solution #6: Profile for client credentials grant type clients
9.3.6.1          Background
To ensure interoperability we propose the need for prescriptive profiles for a client which need to carry out access control when communicating from one machine to another machine which is the resource server.
This solution considers the below aspects for the profile,
Resource server which exposes the APIs.
Authorization server client (confidential client). Example of confidential client is A1 client interacting with the Near RT RIC platform.
Security options with certificate binding [i.6].
9.3.6.2          Solution Description
Table 9.3.6-1 client credentials grant type client profile
NOTE: The design of scopes which is mentioned in the precondition needs further study.
@startuml
hide footbox
skinparam sequenceActorBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceActorBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceParticipantBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceParticipantBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceArrowColor Black
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBorderColor Black
skinparam shadowing false
skinparam NoteBackgroundColor White
skinparam NoteBorderColor Black
participant "Confidential Client" as C
participant "Resource Server" as RS
participant "Authorization Server" as AS
== Pre-condition ==
rnote over RS
P1. Design of scopes
End note
rnote over AS
P2. Administration of RBAC
P3. Publish endpoint locations
and authorization server capabilities
end note
rnote over C
P4. Client X.509 certificate enrollment
End note
== Runtime ==
group Client Interaction
C -> AS: 1. Discover the capabilities of Authorization server
C -> AS: 2. Register client dynamically
loop (for every request)
C -> AS: 3. Client credentials request(access token lifetime with 'expires_in' parameter)
AS -> C: 4. Return token with certificate binding
group Resource Server Interaction
C -> RS: 5. API call (access token with cerificate binding)
End
end
@enduml
Figure 9.3.6-1 Profile for confidential client
9.3.6.3	        Impacts on Existing O-RAN Architecture Elements and Interfaces
Impacts to be considered with respect to the following:
Resource servers
O-RAN related APIs to define the scopes
Authorization server
The OAuth servers should support the following capabilities
Token end points support
Introspection end point
Tokens with reference to access rules
Access token lifetime
Re-authenticate or refresh tokens
Solution options:
RBAC deployment
Client (confidential client)
O-RAN related client credentials grant type clients (e.g., xApps) should be capable making a client credential grant request, processing of response and forwarding the access token in an API call.
Security options
O-RAN related http interfaces should support mTLS with certificate binding in [i.6].
9.3.6.4	        Solution Evaluation
To accomplish the access control securely for the O-RAN related a machine-to-machine clients a combination of the existing RFCs have to be put together in order to maximise security and also ensure simplicity.
9.3.6.5	        Potential Security Recommendations
Editor’s note: The security recommendation will be left for future study.
9.3.7           Solution #7: Resolution of authorization decision between authorization server and resource server
9.3.7.1          Background
In typical operator deployments, RBAC requires that administration and execution of roles (coarse-grained authorization) and permissions (fine-grained authorization) are distributed between the authorization server and resource servers.
Considering the size of a token and that various APIs have different levels of authorization, the permissions are part of the resource server and not part of the confidential client request.
The authorization servers are typically centralized overseeing the administration and validation decision of coarse-grained authorization related roles which are part of the confidential client request. The examples of roles could be considered from Appendix I related to the function set group in [i.24].
The resource servers are typically distributed overseeing the roles to permission mapping administration and validation decision of fine-grained authorization.
Permissions are considered to be the operation (usually CRUD) on a particular object in the resource server as in [i.19] clause 7.
In the solution below we consider examples of roles as rol1, rol2, rol3, etc. to be mapped to permissions per1, per2, per3, etc. for ease of understanding.
NOTE 1:  The above discussion related to coarse-grained authorization and fine-grained authorization which is mentioned in the 9.3.7 needs further study.
NOTE 2:  The above discussion related to roles in [i.24] which is mentioned in the 9.3.7.1 and 9.3.7.3 needs further study.
Figure 9.3.7-1 - Validation decision of roles and permissions
This solution elaborates on the possibilities to
Split the administration of the roles and permissions between the authorization server and resource server.
Validate the decision of the roles and permissions between the authorization server and resource server.
9.3.7.2          Solution Description
Table 9.3.7-1 use case of authorization decision between authorization server and resource server
@startuml
hide footbox
skinparam sequenceActorBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceActorBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceParticipantBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceParticipantBorderColor Black
skinparam sequenceArrowColor Black
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBackgroundColor White
skinparam sequenceLifeLineBorderColor Black
skinparam shadowing false
skinparam NoteBackgroundColor White
skinparam NoteBorderColor Black
Title Authorization resolution for fine-grained authorization
participant "Confidential Client" as C
participant "Resource Server" as RS
participant "Authorization Server" as AS
== Runtime ==
group Client Interaction
C -> AS: 1. Send a token request with requested roles (e.g.:rol1, rol2, rol3..) included in the ‘scope’ attribute
AS -> AS:2. Validate the roles related to the clientID
AS -> C: 3. Return JWT access token with authorized roles(e.g.: rol1) included in the ‘roles’ attribute
loop (for every request)
C -> RS: 4. API call (JWT access token with role(e.g.: rol1))
RS -> RS:5. Check mapping of the role to permission(e.g.: rol1 -> per1)
RS -> RS:6. Validate the permission of the fine-grained authorization operation in the API call
End
end
@enduml
Figure 9.3.7-2 Roles and permission resolution between the authorization server and resource server
9.3.7.3	        Impacts on Existing O-RAN Architecture Elements and Interfaces
O-RAN related confidential clients request access token with the roles as part of the claim. The authorization server administers and validates the roles to client token requests. Examples of roles are defined in function set groups in Appendix I for the network management layer in [i.24].
The O-RAN interfaces (APIs) may factor in the validation of permissions which are mapped to the roles the access token.
9.3.7.4	        Solution Evaluation
Roles have to be resolved and validated by the authorization server.
Roles to permission mapping may be administered and validated in the resource server for the various API calls.
9.3.7.5	        Potential Security Recommendations
Editor’s note: The security recommendation will be left for future study.
10	Study and recommendation an O-RAN Authorization Server architecture
Editor’s note: This section will do a study and recommendation on an authorization server architecture to overlay on the O-RAN architecture.
11	Conclusion
Editor’s note : This clause will provide the summary for the TR and mapping tables the key issues and solutions and it will submit the recommendations to WG1 for O-RAN authorization server.
Annex:Change history/Change request (history)