O-RAN.WG11.TR.Threat-Modeling.O-R004-v05.00
Technical Report
Copyright © 2025 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.
The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this specification in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material of this specification for your personal use, or copy the material of this specification for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.
O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V., Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany
Register of Associations, Bonn VR 11238, VAT ID DE321720189
O-RAN Work Group 11 (Security Work Group)
O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment
Contents
List of figures	4
List of tables	4
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)	5
Foreword	5
Modal verbs terminology	5
1	Scope	6
2	References	6
3	Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations	7
3.1	Definition of terms	7
3.2	Symbols	8
3.3	Abbreviations	8
4	Overview	10
4.1	Objective and structure	10
4.2	Methodology	11
4.3	Document Scope	12
4.3.1	Scope regarding architecture	12
4.3.2	Out of scope components	13
5	Statement of compatibility with 3GPP	14
5.1	Assets and Threats	14
5.2	Security requirements	14
6	Roles-Assumptions-Assets	15
6.1	Stakeholders roles and responsibilities	15
6.2	Assumptions and prerequisites	19
6.3	Critical assets	19
7	Threat model	30
7.1	Threat surface	30
7.2	Threat agent	30
7.3	Potential vulnerabilities	30
7.4	Threats	31
7.4.0	Threat Structure	31
7.4.1	Threats against O-RAN system	32
7.4.2	Threats against O-CLOUD	61
7.4.3	Threats to open source code	80
7.4.4	Physical Threats	80
7.4.5	Threats against 5G radio networks	81
7.4.6	Threats against AI/ML system	82
7.4.7	Protocol Stack Threats	91
7.4.8	SMO Threats	92
7.4.9	Threats against Shared O-RU	99
7.5	Coverage matrix of threats	111
8	Security principles	134
8.1	Principles (SP)	134
8.1.1	SP-AUTH Mutual Authentication	134
8.1.2	SP-ACC Access Control	134
8.1.3	SP-CRYPTO Secure cryptographic, key management and PKI	134
8.1.4	SP-TCOMM Trusted Communication	134
8.1.5	SP-SS Secure storage	135
8.1.6	SP-SB Secure boot and self-configuration	135
8.1.7	SP-UPDT Secure Update	135
8.1.8	SP-RECO Recoverability & Backup	135
8.1.9	SP-OPNS Security management of risks in open-source components	135
8.1.10	SP-ASSU Security Assurance	136
8.1.11	SP-PRV Privacy	136
8.1.12	SP-SLC Continuous security development, testing, logging, monitoring and vulnerability handling	136
8.1.13	SP-ISO Robust Isolation	136
8.1.14	SP-PHY Physical security	137
8.1.15	SP-CLD Secure cloud computing and virtualization	137
8.1.16	SP-ROB Robustness	137
8.1.17	SP-IDM O-Cloud ID secure management	137
8.2	Coverage Threats - Security principles	137
9	Risk assessment	143
9.1	Determination of severity level process	143
9.2	Determination of likelihood level process	146
9.3	Evaluation of the risks process	147
9.4	Risk assessment output	147
Annex: Change history/Change request (history)	180
List of figures
Figure 4-1 : Logical Architecture of O-RAN system [i.6]	13
Figure 7-1 : Threats and Vulnerabilities for O-RAN LLS 7-2x	36
Figure 7-2 : UE Identification in Near-RT-RIC	46
Figure 7-3 : Near-RT-RIC and xApps conflict with E2 node	51
Figure 7-4 : A1 interface between the Non-RT RIC and the Near-RT RIC	57
Figure 7-5 : RAN analytics information (RAI) services via Y1 service interface	61
Figure 7-6 : Illustration of the VM/Container escape attack	66
Figure 7-7 : Illustration of the migration flooding attack	67
Figure 7-8 : Illustration of the false resource advertising attack	67
Figure 7-9 : Illustration of the migration MITM attack	68
Figure 7-10 : Illustration of the Theft-of-Service/DoS Attack	69
Figure 7-11 : Illustration of the VM/Container hyperjacking attack	71
Figure 7-12 : Illustration of a cross VM/Container side channel attack	74
Figure 7-13 : REST Protocol Stack for the A1 and R1 Interfaces	91
Figure 9-1 : Main concepts of risk assessment	143
List of tables
Table 5-1 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Assets and Threats	14
Table 5-2 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Security requirements	14
Table 6-1 : Roles and responsibilities	15
Table 6-2 : Critical assets	21
Table 7-1 : O-RAN Threat Inventory	113
Table 8-1 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (1/4)	138
Table 8-2 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (2/4)	139
Table 8-3 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (3/4)	140
Table 8-4 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (4/4)	141
Table 9-1 : Severity rating	143
Table 9-2 : Likelihood rating	146
Table 9-3 : Risk assessment matrix	147
Table 9-4 : Risk Assessment	148
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
This Intellectual Property Rights Policy (“IPR Policy”) will apply to documents or code developed by the O-RAN ALLIANCE for the purpose of describing key components of a Radio Access Network and their interconnections and performance, including in particular, but not limited to, the functions, behaviors, and requirements for systems, subsystems, software modules, and hardware modules, and the details of the interfaces and APIs that interconnect these components to each other or to external systems and components as well as future amendments or revisions thereto, if any. Except as otherwise defined, all capitalized terms will have the meaning defined for them in the O-RAN Constitution
Foreword
This Technical Report (TR) has been produced by O-RAN Alliance.
The content of the present document is subject to continuing work within O-RAN and may change following formal O-RAN approval. Should the O-RAN Alliance modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN with an identifying change of version date and an increase in version number as follows:
version xx.yy.zz
where:
xx: the first digit-group is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have xx=01). Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
yy: the second digit-group is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
zz: the third digit-group included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process. External versions never include the third digit-group. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
Modal verbs terminology
In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the O-RAN Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).
"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in O-RAN deliverables except when used in direct citation.
Scope
The contents of the present document are subject to continuing work within O-RAN and may change following formal O-RAN approval. Should the O-RAN Alliance modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN with an identifying change of version date and an increase in version number as follows:
version xx.yy.zz
where:
xx:	the first digit-group is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have xx=01).  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
yy:	the second digit-group is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
zz:	the third digit-group included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process. External versions never include the third digit-group.  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
This technical report describes the O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Risk Assessment. It identifies assets to be protected, analyzes the O-RAN components for vulnerabilities, examines potential threats associated with those vulnerabilities, provides security principles which stakeholders should adress when building a secure end-to-end O-RAN system and assesses the risks of the identified threats based on impact and likelihood factors.
NOTE: The present document is transformed from a Technical Specification (TS) to a Technical Report (TR) as it doesn’t containe normartive requirements. Instead, it is an informative document that serves as a vital resource for understanding the potential risks within O-RAN and defining appropriate requirement/controls to mitigate them effectively.
References
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. In the case of a reference to a 3GPP document, a non-specific reference implicitly refers to the latest version of that document in Release 18, or the latest 3GPP release prior to Release 18 that includes that document.
NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, O-RAN cannot guarantee their long-term validity.
3GPP TR 21.905: Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications
3GPP TS 33.511: Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for the next generation Node B (gNodeB) network product class
3GPP TS 33.501: Security architecture and procedures for 5G system
3GPP TR 33.926: Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) threats and critical assets in 3GPP network product classes
3GPP TS 33.117: Catalogue of general security assurance requirements
ORAN ALLIANCE TS “O-RAN Architecture Description”
ISO 27005: Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection — Guidance on managing information security risks
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS “Near-RT RIC Architecture”
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS “O-RAN Acceleration Abstraction Layer General Aspects and Principles”
O-RAN ALLIANCE: “O-RAN WG4 “Control, User and Synchronization Plane Specification”
O-RAN ALLIANCE TR “Cloud Architecture and Deployment Scenarios for O-RAN Virtualized RAN”
ERICSSON ‘Security Considerations of Open RAN’ whitepaper and slides.
NIST Special Publication 800-154 2 Guide to Data-Centric System Threat Modeling
Resource Allocation Scheme in 5G Network Slices
3GPP TR 33.818: “Security Assurance Methodology (SECAM) and Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for 3GPP virtualized network products”.
Fraunhofer AISEC - threat analysis of container-as-a-service for network function virtualization
Ecology-Based DoS Attack in Cognitive Radio Networks
AN ARCHITECTURAL RISK ANALYSIS OF MACHINE LEARNING SYSTEMS: Toward More Secure Machine Learning
5G Americas Whitepaper October 2018 “The Evolution of Security in 5G”
3GPP TR 33.845: Study on security aspects of the 5G Service Based Architecture (SBA)
OWASP API Security Top 10
MITRE ATT&CK containers matrix
3GPP TR 33.848: Study on security impacts of virtualisation
Graz University of Technology (2018), Meltdown and Specter
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller and E2 interface; E2 General Aspects and Principles"
NIST Special Publication 800-207, “Zero Trust Architecture,” https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-207/final
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "Management Plane Specification".
CWE-524, "Use of Cache Containing Sensitive Information", https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/524.html
CAPEC-204, “Lifting Sensitive Data Embedded in Cache”, https://capec.mitre.org/data/definitions/204.html
Infiltrating Corporate Intranet Like NSA, https://i.blackhat.com/USA-19/Wednesday/us-19-Tsai-Infiltrating-Corporate-Intranet-Like-NSA.pdf
Output Integrity Attack, https://owasp.org/www-project-machine-learning-security-top-10/docs/ML09_2023-Output_Integrity_Attack
ENISA: “Securing Machine Learning Algorithms”; https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/securing-machine-learning-algorithms
OWASP Top 10 Machine Learning Security risks, 2023 https://owasp.org/www-project-machine-learning-security-top-10/
O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: “O2dms Interface Specification: Kubernetes Native API Profile for Containerized NFs”
NIST Glossary, NIST Computer Resource Center, Glossary | CSRC (nist.gov)
Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations
Definition of terms
For the purposes of the present document, the terms and definitions given in 3GPP TR 21.905 [i.1], O-RAN [i.6], [i.9], [i.11] and the following apply:
Attack: The realization of some specific threat that impacts the confidentiality, integrity, accountability, or availability of a resource. [adapted from i.35]
Attack surface: The set of points on the boundary of a system, a system component, or an environment where an attacker can try to enter, cause an effect on, or extract data from, that system, component, or environment. [i.35]
O-Cloud instance ID: The O-Cloud instance ID is a unique identifier assigned to components within the O-Cloud platform, including VMs, pods, containers, nodes, and compute pools (i.e., a cluster in Kubernetes). This ensures uniqueness across the entire O-Cloud environment, irrespective of the component type. For instance, a VM, a pod, a container, a node, and a cluster will each have a distinct O-Cloud instance ID within the platform, ensuring that there is no ambiguity in identification.
Radio jamming is the deliberate jamming, blocking or creating interference with authorized wireless network. A radio jammer is a transmitter that tunes to the same frequency as the opponents’ receiving equipment and with the same type of modulation, with enough power to override any signal at the receiver.
Radio Sniffing technique helps to decode all sorts of essential network configuration details easily with low-cost software radios. Sniffing information can aid attackers in optimizing and crafting attacks.
Risk: A measure of the extent to which an entity is threatened by a potential circumstance or event, and typically a function of: (i) the adverse impacts that would arise if the circumstance or event occurs; and (ii) the likelihood of occurrence. Information system-related security risks arise from the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information or information systems and reflect the potential adverse impacts to organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation), organizational assets, individuals, and other organizations. [i.35]
Risk mitigation: Prioritizing, evaluating, and implementing the appropriate risk-reducing controls/countermeasures recommended from the risk management process. [i.35]
RF spoofing refers to transmitting a fake signal meant to pretence as an actual signal.
Security controls: Actions, devices, procedures, techniques, or other measures that reduce the vulnerability of an information system. [i.35]
Technical controls: The security controls for an information system that are primarily implemented and executed by the information system through mechanisms contained in the hardware, software, or firmware components of the system. [i.35]. Also referred to as ‘Security Controls’ and ‘Controls’ in O-RAN.
Threat: Any circumstance or event with the potential to adversely impact organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation), organizational assets, or individuals through an information system via unauthorized access, destruction, disclosure, modification of information, and/or denial of service. Also, the potential for a threat-source to successfully exploit a particular information system vulnerability. [i.35]
Vulnerability: Weakness in a system, system security procedures, internal controls, or implementation that could be exploited or triggered by a threat. [i.35]
Y1: An interface over which RAN analytics services are exposed by the Near-RT RIC to be consumed by Y1 consumers.
Y1 consumers: A role played by entities within or outside of the PLMN trust domain that consumes the Y1 services produced by the Near-RT RIC.
Symbols
For the purposes of the present document, the symbols apply: none
Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given in 3GPP TR 21.905 and the following apply:
Overview
Objective and structure
O-RAN architecture [i.6] differs significantly from the architecture of 3GPP RAN. It involves introducing new components, interfaces, and technologies, which give rise to new actors (stakeholders) and enable novel business models. Consequently, the attack surface expands considerably, and we anticipate that O-RAN design and deployment will present numerous security challenges and associated risks. These challenges primarily stem from various factors, such as the inclusion of O-RAN specific interfaces and components, the utilization of virtualization/containerization techniques, the incorporation of open-source code, and the capability to support AI/ML models, among other considerations.
Additionally, the O-RAN architecture is being developed using zero trust (ZT) and zero trust architecture (ZTA) principles as described in the NIST Zero Trust Architecture Special Publication [i.26]. Zero trust is an evolving set of cybersecurity paradigms that move defenses from static, network-based perimeters to focus on users, assets, and resources. Zero trust assumes there is no implicit trust granted to assets or user accounts based solely on their physical or network location (i.e., local area networks versus the internet) or based on asset ownership (enterprise or personally owned). Zero trust also assumes that an adversary can always be in the network. According to the publication [i.26], zero trust is based on the following tenets that can be adapted to the O-RAN architecture. Full descriptions of each tenet can be found in [i.26].
[ZT-1] All data sources and computing services are considered resources.
[ZT-2] All communication is secured regardless of network location.
[ZT-3] Access to individual enterprise resources is granted on a per-session basis.
[ZT-4] Access to resources is determined by dynamic policy—including the observable state of client identity, application/service, and the requesting asset—and may include other behavioral and environmental attributes.
[ZT-5] The enterprise monitors and measures the integrity and security posture of all owned and associated assets. No asset is inherently trusted.
[ZT-6] All resource authentication and authorization are dynamic and strictly enforced before access is allowed.
[ZT-7] The enterprise collects as much information as possible about the current state of assets, network infrastructure and communications and uses it to improve its security posture.
Therefore, the security analysis and the threat model for O-RAN must be carefully studied and relevant assets/stakeholders/vulnerabilities/threats/requirements/countermeasures/recommendations must be identified to reduce risk exposure, mitigate any harmful effects, and drive to a ZTA.
The material presented in this analysis aims at supporting various O-RAN stakeholders understanding the relevant threats resulting to an exposure of O-RAN assets by exploiting the vulnerabilities.
The objective is to give a comprehensive and high-level view on how security is organized in O-RAN system. In this document, we assume that 3GPP security requirements are met. Unless explicitly stated, features relate to O-RAN specifications.
This analysis is consolidated from various relevant sources, including main 5G standardization documents and telecommunication best practices (e.g., 3GPP, ETSI, NIST, ENISA).
The first main part outlines the main stockholder roles involved in managing and using O-RAN system. Further, it addresses the prerequisites and assumptions needed to securely implement and run O-RAN systems. It also identifies the list of critical assets to be protected in integrity, availability, confidentiality, replay and authenticity.
The second main part addresses the threat model. It identifies the threat agents, determines the threat surface, identifies vulnerabilities, and lists the threats for each O-RAN component or interface. For each threat, the description, threatened asset(s), vulnerabilities, threat agents and affected components are given.
The third main part describes the security principles to be achieved to counter the identified threats. In addition, it illustrates the coverage between threats and security principles.
The fourth main part is the risk assessment of the identified threats in terms of severity and likelihood.
NOTE 1:  The present documentfocuses only on the components, interfaces and protocols specified by O-RAN alliance. Components, interfaces and protocols specified by 3GPP are only referenced where needed but are not within the scope of this specific O-RAN security analysis.
NOTE 2: The present document is a working document with the need to update the content on a regular basis following the risk evaluation.
NOTE 3: In this document, the term NF (Network Function) is used to designate either VNF (Virtual Network Function), CNF (Cloud-native Network Function) or PNF (Physical Network Function).
NOTE 4: Terms “Containers” and “Virtual Machines” are used interchangeably in this document as the implementation of O-RAN SW components could either be container-based, VM-based or hybrid (Containers and VMs together).
Methodology
The methodology adopted in this document is based on the standard ISO 27005 [i.7] which provide a detailed and flexible structure to release a risk assessment.
The methodology followed in this document comprises three stages:
Identification
Identify stakeholders: First, we need to identify the stakeholders involved in the implementation, management, operation and maintenance of the O-RAN system. Roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder are given.
Define assumptions: The list of minimum prerequisites and assumptions need to be defined for the operational environment (not under the control of the O-RAN system) required to successfully operate the O-RAN system.
Identify assets: First, we need to locate relevant assets the O-RAN system hold and give details about the type (Data, component, etc.), the security properties (CIA) at rest and in transit and location.
Identify threats: We need to identify the relevant threats associated with the new O-RAN components, interfaces and technologies. In addition, the threat surface and agents are given.
Identify vulnerabilities: O-RAN system may have weaknesses in its new O-RAN components, interfaces and technologies which need to be identified.
Define security principles: We need to define security principles to be achieved in order to reduce risk exposure.
Elaborate and refine security principles: Each security principle needs to be detailed and refined into requirements, recommendations and countermeasures.
Identify existing/ongoing countermeasures: We need to identify all of O-RAN existing/ongoing controls and to take into account the protection provided by these controls before applying any new ones.
Risk assessment
The value for Risk is defined by the following equation:
Risk = (the probability of a threat exploiting a vulnerability) x (total impact of the vulnerability being exploited)
Risk treatment
Now that we know the level of risk that each threat poses, we need to decide how we’ll treat them. There are four options:
Modify the risk by implementing a control to reduce the likelihood of it occurring.
Avoid the risk by ceasing any activity that creates it. This response is appropriate if the risk is too big to manage with a security control.
Share the risk with a third party. There are two ways: by outsourcing the security efforts to another organization or by purchasing cyber insurance to ensure the funds to respond appropriately in the event of a disaster.
Retain the risk. This means that the organization accepts the risk and believes that the cost of treating it is greater than the damage that it would cause.
Document Scope
This clause comprises the architecture in the scope of the security analysis. The architecture includes the list of O-RAN components, interfaces and protocols manipulating critical assets and implementing security functions.
Scope regarding architecture
As specified in [i.6], the logical architecture of O-RAN includes the following components, interfaces and protocols:
O-RAN components:
Network functions and applications
Service Management and Orchestration (SMO)
Non-RT RIC and rApps
Near-RT RIC and xApps
O-CU-CP/UP
O-DU
O-RU
O-eNB
Cloud computing platform
O-Cloud comprising a collection of physical infrastructure nodes that meet O-RAN requirements to host the relevant O-RAN functions (such as Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, and O-DU), the supporting software components (such as Operating System, Virtual Machine Monitor, Container Runtime, etc.) and the appropriate management and orchestration functions.
O-RAN specific interfaces:
A1 Interface between   Non-RT   RIC   and   Near-RT   RIC   to   enable   policy-driven   guidance   of   Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.
O1 Interface connecting the SMO to the Near-RT RIC, one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, and one or more O-DUs.
O2 Interface between the SMO and the O-Cloud.
E2 Interface connecting the Near-RT RIC and one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, one or more O-DUs, and one or more O-eNBs.
Open Fronthaul CUS-Plane Interface between O-RU and O-DU.
Open Fronthaul M-Plane Interface between O-RU and O-DU as well as between O-RU and SMO.
Y1 Interface over which RAN analytics services exposed by the Near-RT RIC to be consumed by Y1 consumers.
Relevant Protocols used by O-RAN system for enforcing security:
TLS
Should be used to protect the traffic between the O-RAN system and other network elements. It establishes a secure channel and provides CIA (Confidentiality, Integrity, Authenticity) features.
Should be used in O1 interface for NETCONF over TLS and JSON/REST over TLS
Should be used in A1 interface
SSH
Should be used in O1 interface and Fronthaul M-Plane for NETCONF over SSH
IPSEC
Should be used to protect E2 traffic
FTP and FTPS
Should be used to protect file transfers over O1 and Fronthaul M-Plane interfaces
PTP (Precision Timing Protocol, IEEE 1588-2019)
Figure 4-1 : Logical Architecture of O-RAN system [i.6]
Out of scope components
The following components are not in the perimeter of the O-RAN system defined by the alliance; therefore, they are considered out of scope of this study:
3GPP interfaces are already studied and maintained by 3GPP,
UE,
MEC,
Core,
Antennas.
Statement of compatibility with 3GPP
This chapter gives the statement of compatibility with 3GPP/SCAS security Assets, Threats and Requirements. The statement of compatibility shows that 3GPP Assets/Threats/Requirements are applicable and that there is no conflict affecting the security of O-RAN components.
Assets and Threats
Table 5-1 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Assets and Threats
In addition, the assets/threats related to the additional specific O-RAN interfaces and components are considered. As a result, clauses 6.3 and 7.4 elaborates the O-RAN specific assets and threats respectively.
Security requirements
Table 5-2 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Security requirements
In addition, O-RAN also needs to consider the security requirements related to the additional specific O-RAN interfaces and components. As a result, clause 8 focus on the O-RAN security principles.
Roles-Assumptions-Assets
Stakeholders roles and responsibilities
The main stakeholders managing and using the O-RAN system are the following:
Table 6-1 : Roles and responsibilities
NOTE 1: The operation, administration and orchestration of the O-RAN system can be split across multiple companies or roles.
NOTE 2: A trust management mechanism becomes crucially important to realize trustworthy collaboration among the O-RAN stakeholders.
Assumptions and prerequisites
This section contains the list of minimum prerequisites and assumptions for equipment, software vendors, users and the physical environment to successfully operate the O-RAN system.
The operational environment of the O-RAN system provides reliable timestamps for the generation of audit records, etc.
Administrators, integrators, operators and orchestrators are trustworthy, and trained such that they are capable of securely managing the O-RAN system and following the instructions provided by O-RAN Alliance as well as the provided guidance by vendors and service providers.
Log files, secrets and credentials stored in external systems and related to O-RAN are protected. They are access controlled so only privileged users have access to those secrets/credentials.
Critical assets
The following table gives the list of critical assets to be protected within the O-RAN system.
An asset in this context may encompass data, interface or component deemed valuable for the O-RAN system. A component is defined as an O-RAN network function or architectural element.
Here's an explanation of each column, along with guidance on how to fill out the table:
Asset ID: It identifies each asset uniquely. It helps in cataloging and referencing specific assets systematically.
Asset Description: A brief description of what the asset is, including its purpose, contents, and any relevant attributes.
Component: It specifies the O-RAN element(s) the asset is associated with, such as O-DU, O-RU, SMO, etc. This clarifies the asset's location within the O-RAN architecture.
Interface: It indicates the interface through which the asset communicates or interacts with other elements. This could be internal interfaces or external interfaces.
NOTE: Assets can either be confined to a component (for those not shared with other O-RAN elements) or be present within a component and also transmitted to other O-RAN elements over interfaces. The way in which the 'Component' and 'Interface' columns are filled out will vary based on these situations.
When: It is a categorization of the asset's state in terms of its lifecycle or operational phase, like "at rest" or "in transit". It is used to indicate when certain protection levels should be applied.
When (At rest): Marks with an 'x' if the asset needs protection while it is at rest (stored and not actively being used or transmitted).
When (In transit): Marks with an 'x' if the asset needs protection during transit (being transmitted or moved).
Protection level (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability, Replay, Authenticity): These columns specify the type of protection or security measure required for the asset. An 'x' in any of these sub-columns indicates a need for measures to ensure:
Confidentiality: The asset should be accessible only to authorized entities.
Integrity: The asset should be protected from unauthorized changes.
Availability: The asset should be accessible to authorized entities when needed.
Replay: Protection against replay attacks, ensuring that repeated or delayed transmissions are identified and prevented.
Authenticity: The asset should be verifiable as genuine.
Instructions for completing the table:
Asset ID: Assign a unique identifier to each asset.
Asset Description: Provide a detailed description of the asset, including its nature, purpose, and any other relevant details.
Component: Specify the component associated with the asset, if applicable.
Interface: Indicate the interface(s) related to the asset.
When (At rest/In transit): Mark with an 'x' if the asset requires protection either at rest or in transit.
Protection level: Mark with an 'x' in the appropriate sub-columns to indicate the types of protection required for the asset.
The categories "Data" and "Components" are defined as follows:
Data: It refers to the information that is processed, stored, and transmitted through the O-RAN architecture.
Components: It involves the physical (Hardware), logical and virtual (Software) parts of the O-RAN system.
Table 6-2 : Critical assets
Threat model
Threat surface
The O-RAN architecture [i.6] introduces new functions and interfaces. The introduction of additional interfaces and nodes, and the decoupling of hardware and software, expands the threat and attack surface of the network. For the purposes of this document, threat surfaces are divided into six (6) main groups:
Additional functions: SMO, Non-Real-Time RIC, Near-Real-Time RIC
Additional open interfaces: A1, E2, O1, O2, Open Fronthaul
Modified architecture: Lower Layer Split (LLS) 7-2x
Decoupling increases threat to Trust Chain
Containerization and Virtualization: Disaggregation of software and hardware
Exposure to public exploits may be increased due to use of Open Source Code
The following entry points are considered:
API between planes which facilitate the propagation of threats
Threats coming from inside the O-RAN system
Threats coming from outside the O-RAN system
Threat agent
For the purposes of this document, threat agents are categorized as follows:
Cyber-criminals: Represents individuals who commits cybercrimes, where he/she makes use of the computer either as a tool or as a target or as both.
Insiders: Represents malicious attacks perpetrated on a network or computer system by a person with authorized system access.
Hacktivists: Represents actors that perform cyber-attacks to achieve political or social gains.
Cyber-terrorists: Represents actors that their sole aim of violence against clandestine agents and subnational groups through the compromise of O-RAN infrastructures.
Script kiddies: Represents actors that do not poses deep technical expertise or resources to perform sophisticated attacks.
Nation-State: actors aggressively target and gain persistent access to public and private sector networks to compromise, steal, change, or destroy information.
Potential vulnerabilities
This document addresses the following potential security vulnerabilities that are exploitable through attacks against Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability:
O-RAN specific vulnerabilities
Unauthorized access to O-DU, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP and RU to degrade RAN performance or execute broader network attack (Availability)
Unprotected synchronization and control plane traffic on Open Fronthaul Interface (Integrity and Availability)
Disable over-the-air ciphers for eavesdropping (Confidentiality)
Near-RT RIC conflicts with O-gNB (Availability)
x/rApps conflicts (Availability)
x/rApps access to network and subscriber data (Confidentiality)
Unprotected management interface (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability)
CP UL or DL messages can be injected for attack on UP (Availability)
General vulnerabilities
Decoupling of functions without hardware root of trust and software trust chain (Integrity)
Exposure to public exploits from use of Open Source code (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability)
Misconfiguration, poor isolation or insufficient access management in the O-Cloud platform (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability)
Threats
Threat Structure
The threat analysis is carried out using a well-defined structure to present each threat case and simplify the risk analysis associated with each threat. The following table is the template used to present the threat characteristics:
For identifying threat types, we are using STRIDE, which categories threats into six distinct types:
S - Spoofing identity. An application or program can masquerade as another to gain advantages not typically allowed for that program.
T - Tampering with data. This involves the malicious modification of data, including making unauthorized changes to a database and alteration of data as it flows between computers.
R - Repudiation. A user or program refuses the authenticity of a good or reasonable command or action.
I - Information disclosure. This involves the exposure of information to individuals with unauthorized access to it. For example, users gain the ability to read a file that they normally would not have been granted access to, or an intruder can read data in transit between computers.
D - Denial of service. These attacks deny service to valid users, such as making a website unavailable or unusable by flooding it with illegitimate requests to keep legitimate users without access.
E - Elevation of privileges. An unauthorized user gains privileged rights to access previously not granted to compromise or destroy the system, such as a change in membership.
STRIDE maps different threat types to their corresponding impacts on system security, as shown in the following table:
Threats against O-RAN system
Common among O-RAN components
The O-RAN system architecture introduces the following common threats among its components:
Threats against the Open Fronthaul interface and M-S-C-U planes
The LLS architecture and the fronthaul interface introduce the following threats:
Figure 7-1 : Threats and Vulnerabilities for O-RAN LLS 7-2x
Threats against O-RU
Generic threats
The O-RU introduces the following threats:
Centralized user management for the O-RU related threats
Threats against Near-RT RIC
Near-Real-Time (RT) RIC introduces the following threats:
Figure 7-2 : UE Identification in Near-RT-RIC
Threats against Non-RT RIC
Threats against Non-RT RIC include:
Threats against xApps
xApps introduce the following threats:
Figure 7-3 : Near-RT-RIC and xApps conflict with E2 node
Threats against rApps
Threats against rApps include:
Threats against PNF
Threats against R1 interface
The R1 interface facilitates inter-connection between rApps and Non-RT RIC framework supplied by different vendors, and provides a level of abstraction between rApps and Non-RT RIC framework/SMO that can be the consumers and or producers of R1 services.
Threats against A1 interface
The A1 interface enables the Non-RT RIC function to provide policy-based guidance, ML model management and enrichment information to the Near-RT RIC function for RAN optimization.  The Non-RT RIC can provide enrichment information over the A1 interface to support the policy enforcement in the Near-RT RIC.  The A1 interface is used for discovery, request and delivery of A1 Enrichment Information and discovery of External Enrichment Information.
Figure 7-4 : A1 interface between the Non-RT RIC and the Near-RT RIC
Threats against application life cycle
7.4.1.12	Threats against E2 interface
E2 is a logical interface connecting the Near-RT RIC with an E2 Node as defined in [i.25]. The E2 functions are grouped into the following categories:
Near-RT RIC Services
Near-RT RIC support functions
7.4.1.13	Threats against Y1 interface
The Near-RT RIC provides RAN analytics information (RAI) services via Y1 service interface. These services can be consumed by Y1 consumers by subscribing to or requesting the RAN analytics information via the Y1 service interface. Y1 consumers may be Application Functions (AFs) which are within an O-RAN trusted domain. AFs outside the O-RAN trusted domain may use Y1 services, too. Further details are available in the O-RAN Architecture Description [i.6], clauses 5.1 and 5.4.18.
Figure 7-5 : RAN analytics information (RAI) services via Y1 service interface
Malicious Y1 consumers may use their access through the Y1 interface with the intent of accessing, manipulating or negatively impacting the privacy of subscribers, the RAN or the core network.
Threats against O-CLOUD
Virtualization and containerization technologies in O-RAN introduce the following relevant threats:
Generic Threats
Threats concerning VMs/Containers
Figure 7-6 : Illustration of the VM/Container escape attack
Figure 7-7 : Illustration of the migration flooding attack
Figure 7-8 : Illustration of the false resource advertising attack
Figure 7-9 : Illustration of the migration MITM attack
Figure 7-10 : Illustration of the Theft-of-Service/DoS Attack
Threats concerning VM/Container images
Threats concerning the virtualization layer (Host OS-Hypervisor/Container engine)
Figure 7-11 : Illustration of the VM/Container hyperjacking attack
Threats concerning O-Cloud interfaces
O2 interface
Two main interfaces are defined in O-RAN WG6 specification and identified as critical assets of O-Cloud, i.e. interfaces O2 between O-Cloud and SMO. The threats on these interfaces are as follows.
O-Cloud API
Threats concerning hardware resources
Figure 7-12 : Illustration of a cross VM/Container side channel attack
Threats concerning O-Cloud management (SMO, NFO, FOCOM)
Threats concerning Acceleration Abstraction Layer (AAL)
Threats concerning O-Cloud instance ID
Threats concerning time synchronization
Threats to open source code
Open source introduces the following threats:
Physical Threats
Threats against 5G radio networks
Threats against 5G radio networks include:
Threats against AI/ML system
Introduction
This section provides the relevant threats against the AI/ML system implemented in O-RAN architecture.
Input Manipulation Attacks
Data poisoning attacks
Membership Inference Attacks
Model Stealing
Model Inversion Threats
AI Supply Chain Attacks
Output Integrity Attack
Model Poisoning
Model Skewing Attacks
Transfer Learning Attack
AI Energy-Latency Attack
Evasion attack
Protocol Stack Threats
The A1 and R1 interfaces use the REST protocol stack shown in the figure below.  The transport network layer is built on IP transport. TCP provides the communication service at the transport layer.  HTTP is the application-level protocol used providing reliable transport of messages.  TLS provides secure HTTP connections for secure transport of messages.  The application layer protocol is based on a RESTful approach with transfer of JSON formatted policy statements. Each of these protocols has known vulnerabilities that can be exploited by a malicious actor.
Figure 7-13 : REST Protocol Stack for the A1 and R1 Interfaces
SMO Threats
General SMO Threats
SMO Threats at O2 interface
SMO Threats at External interfaces
Threats against Shared O-RU
Threat Analysis tables are provided for each of the identified Shared O-RU threats in the clauses below. The Shared O-RU Threats are classified into 6 threat groups:
Lateral Movement Between Network Functions
Physical Port Access Threats
Data Access Threats
Availability Threats
Configuration Threats
Resiliency Threats
Use of the term “MNO Tenant” or “Tenant” refers to a “Shared Resource Operator (SRO)” as defined in [i.27].
Lateral Movement Between Network Functions
This clause provides threat analysis tables for threats to access between Shared O-RU network functions.
Physical Port Access Threats
This clause provides threat analysis tables for physical port access threats to Shared O-RU.
Data Access Threats
This clause provides threat analysis tables for threats to Shared O-RU data access.
Availability Threats
This clause provides threat analysis tables for availability threats to Shared O-RU.
Configuration Threats
This clause provides threat analysis tables for configuration threats to Shared O-RU.
Resiliency Threats
This clause provides threat analysis tables for threats introduced by the O-DU Resiliency use case.
Coverage matrix of threats
From the above threats, a threat inventory is developed to provide a mapping between threats, vulnerabilities and assets. For the purposes of this document, threats have been grouped into two categories:
‘O-RAN specific’ comprises threats directly relating to O-RAN components and interfaces
‘General’ covers threats relating to physical, open source, virtualization, IoT and radio aspects
The threat inventory provides details of each individual threat: threat agents, vulnerabilities, threatened assets and affected components.
Table 7-1 : O-RAN Threat Inventory
Security principles
This clause elucidates security principles that an O-RAN system should achieve. They provide high level and abstract statement of the intended solution to countering potential Threats. Each security principle references applicable ZT tenets.
Principles (SP)
SP-AUTH Mutual Authentication
Mutual authentication SHOULD be established to allow the O-RAN system verifying who performs what, thus possible to detect fake base stations, unauthorized or malicious components, malicious applications and malicious users/administrators.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-6
SP-ACC Access Control
The O-RAN system SHOULD forbid unauthorized administrators or components to access O-RAN resources or services anytime and anywhere. Access controls are required for:
Network Access Controls for filtering unauthorized/unexpected traffic in the O-RAN components over their interfaces.
Access controls to restrict access to component configurations.
Access controls for hardware to maintain the trust chain.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-6
SP-CRYPTO Secure cryptographic, key management and PKI
Well-known, standardized, secure and unbroken cryptographic schemes and protocols SHOULD be used. Proprietary schemes and protocols SHOULD be avoided.
A secure key management of O-RAN keys (KgNB, KRRC-enc, KRRC-int, KUP-int, and KUP-enc, ksn) SHOULD be implemented to manage all the steps of key lifecycle: key generation using an appropriate level of entropy from a reliable source, secure key storage, key rotation and revocation, secure key destruction, etc.
Reliable PKI for authentication and data encryption SHOULD be used. Public CAs SHOULD be supported. The certificates SHOULD be issued by a trusted or rooted Certificate Authority (CA). The CA implements the Certificate Policy which specifies the rules and policies about who may or may not receive a Certificate. Relying parties can access the Certificate Policy to determine what validation/verification checks were performed prior to certificate issuance.
Each O-RU SHOULD be configured with lists of algorithms which are allowed for usage. There SHOULD be one list for integrity algorithms, and one for ciphering algorithms. These lists SHOULD be ordered according to a priority decided by the operator.
ZT Tenets: ZT-2, ZT-4
SP-TCOMM Trusted Communication
Integrity, confidentiality, availability, authenticity and replay protection of resources SHOULD be ensured in transit (see ‘Critical Assets’, clause 6.3) over O-RAN interfaces.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2
SP-SS Secure storage
Integrity, confidentiality, availability protection of O-RAN resources SHOULD be ensured at rest (see ‘Critical Assets’, clause 6.3).
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-6
SP-SB Secure boot and self-configuration
O-RAN components SHOULD secure their firmware and configuration to provide the opportunity for trust to be extended higher in the software stack. Verified platform firmware can, in turn, verify the operating system (OS) boot loader, which can then verify other software components all the way up to the OS itself, the hypervisor or container runtime layers and O-RAN components. The transitive trust SHOULD be consistent with the concept of the chain of trust (CoT)-a method where each piece of code in the boot process measures and checks the signature of the next stage of the boot process before the software boots.
The secure boot process, signature verification and self-configuration SHOULD be securely implemented for all O-RAN components to authenticate them before loading.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-5
SP-UPDT Secure Update
A secure update management process SHOULD be implemented for introducing a new component or software change into the O-RAN system. The process SHOULD consider the ability to update the cryptographic algorithms and to adapt to upcoming O-RAN security challenges. A timely update cycles if vulnerabilities are discovered SHOULD be in place.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-5, ZT-7
SP-RECO Recoverability & Backup
A recoverability process to recovery in case of denial of service SHOULD be implemented. An approach for detecting and mitigating DoS attacks SHOULD be in place.
O-RAN vendors SHOULD define a recovery plan that resets the O-RAN components to a trustworthy state in case of a malfunction or an attack (e.g. DoS).
Backup systems SHOULD be in place to allow data or component on the O-RAN to be secured. Backup systems SHOULD ensure a suitable level of data or component availability and reliability.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-5, ZT6, ZT-7
SP-OPNS Security management of risks in open-source components
Vendors using open-source code SHOULD enhance its security by applying industry coding best practices. It is recommended that vendors practice a higher level of due diligence for exposure to public exploits when using Open-Source code.
A Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) SHOULD be maintained to track which open-source components are in use and where.
Security Analysis (Audit, vulnerability scan, etc.) SHOULD be performed to ensure all identified components are free of security vulnerabilities.
A proper policy and process SHOULD be in place for identifying and patching known issues with the open-source components. Open-source software components SHOULD be kept up to date and patched.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-6, ZT-7
SP-ASSU Security Assurance
Mobile networks are classified as critical infrastructure making security assurance especially more than relevant:
Vendors SHOULD ensure and prove that its software or hardware meets 3GPP Security Assurance Specifications (SCAS).
Vendors SHOULD ensure and prove that its software or hardware fulfils O-RAN security tests, requirements and recommendations provided by O-RAN alliance.
Vendors SHOULD ensure and prove that their software or hardware meets the needs of many national and international cybersecurity regulations, such as the Cyber Act, GDPR, etc.
Vendors SHOULD provide risk assessment, secure code review, penetration testing, vulnerability analysis and hardening guidelines for their O-RAN components.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-5, ZT-7
SP-PRV Privacy
In O-RAN, the privacy of end users SHOULD be considered. The privacy of end users can be divided into data privacy, identity privacy and personal information privacy. Most Communication services are to gather data and personal information around end users, which may reveal information sensitive to their privacy. Adversaries would further extract more personal information about end users, such as UE priority, location information, trajectory, and preference.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-6, ZT-7
SP-SLC Continuous security development, testing, logging, monitoring and vulnerability handling
Continuous development and continuous integration (CD/CI) with continuous regression testing and software security auditing SHOULD be implemented.
Relevant activities events SHOULD be logged and logs collected SHOULD be analyzed in real time for the identification of potential security attacks and for security auditing.
Continuous monitoring SHOULD be implemented to verify that the wanted security state is maintained throughout the lifecycle of deployed O-RAN components.
Vulnerability management SHOULD be in place with intelligence to continuously track, identify and remediate vulnerable applications. Vendors SHOULD keep track of any new vulnerabilities discovered and is ready to act on customer product security incidents and reported security issues affecting O-RAN components.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-6, ZT-7
SP-ISO Robust Isolation
In a multi-vendor environment, intra-domain host isolation SHOULD be enforced. In the same host, VMs, CNs, virtualization/container layer, CPU, storage, and network security isolation of resources SHOULD be ensured by implementing system security orchestration, segmentation, lifecycle management, time scheduling, monitoring and audit on the management, signaling, control and data planes, and the execution of virtualized O-RAN components.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-7
SP-PHY Physical security
The O-RAN system SHOULD be located at physically secure environment in a way that minimizes the risk of resource theft and destruction. It SHOULD support secure storage of sensitive data (cryptographic keys and configuration data), execution of sensitive functions (encryption/decryption, authentication), and execution of boot and update processes.
Special attention SHOULD be paid to the site intrusion and physical access threats against O-RU sites. Consequently O-RU equipment SHOULD disable all unnecessary physical and logical ports, protocols and interfaces. In addition, secure physical connections to O-RU for O&M operations SHOULD be implemented (e.g. secure laptop with secure credentials).
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-6, ZT-7
SP-CLD Secure cloud computing and virtualization
Defense methods SHOULD be implemented: virtual machine-based intrusion detection, virtual machine-based isolation, virtual machine-based kernel protection, virtual machine-based access control, and virtual machine-based trusted computing.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-6, ZT-7
SP-ROB Robustness
The O-RAN system SHOULD not only ensure the robustness of software or hardware resources, but also guarantee the robustness of the cognitive radio channel for meeting the QoS of communication services required by users. In some scenarios, the robustness of spectrum sensing SHOULD be enhanced when some sensing nodes (e.g., O-RU) easily malfunction. Robustness is an essential consideration for overcoming the security threats caused by jamming, DoS or DDoS attacks.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-2, ZT-3, ZT-5, ZT-6, ZT-7
SP-IDM O-Cloud ID secure management
To counter threats associated with ID reuse, mismanagement, and redundancy, the O-Cloud should employ robust strategies for ID generation, validation, and lifecycle management. Properly managed IDs reduce risks of data inconsistencies, unauthorized access, and operational inefficiencies.
ZT Tenets: ZT-1, ZT-3, ZT-4, ZT-5, ZT-6, ZT-7
Coverage Threats - Security principles
The table below illustrates how threats are covered by security principles. It outlines the list of security principles contributing to counter threats.
Table 8-1 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (1/4)
Table 8-2 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (2/4)
Table 8-3 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (3/4)
Table 8-4 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (4/4)
Risk assessment
After identifying the list of assets, threats and vulnerabilities, the next step is the risk assessment. The main concepts of risk assessment are illustrated in the following figure.
Figure 9-1 : Main concepts of risk assessment
The criticality of the identified threats in clause 7.4 were assessed based on the severity (consequence) and the likelihood of occurrence. Indications of severity level for each threat are given whether they are considered as high, medium, or low. This severity is a global perception of the risk based on its impacts. In practice, it varies strongly depending on the use cases and deployment/configuration models of the O-RAN system.
Moreover, the type of loss (availability, integrity and/ or confidentiality) has been assessed for each threat.
Determination of severity level process
The process followed to determine the severity level resulting from threats that successfully exploit vulnerabilities is based on Table 9-1 which includes the definition in terms of Privacy, Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability of the three severity levels ‘Low’, ‘Medium’ and ‘High’ shown here as green, yellow and red.
Table 9-1 defines what “low,” “medium” and “high” means.
The severity of an impact is expressed as follows:
Level of impact for various threats on the properties Privacy, Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability
Scale of impact, depending on the number of affected O-RUs and /or O-DUs.
Scale of impact depending on the Clock Model and Synchronization Topology configurations LLS-C1, LLS-C2, LLS-C3 and LLS-C4 [i.10].
Adverse impacts depending on whether or not existing requirments and controls are already defined in the O-RAN requirments specifications.
Table 9-1 : Severity rating
NOTE 1: The severity level depends on the number of affected RUs and O-DUs. The severity level is consequently 'Low' in case of one affected O-RU, 'Medium' in case of one affected O-DU with its related multiple O-RUs, and 'High' for multiple affected O-DUs-O-RUs. Operators conducting a full risk analysis according to this report should conduct a use case-based analysis taking into account the likelihood and the real deployment of the O-RAN system.
NOTE 2:
Configuration LLS-C1
In LLS-C1, the network timing is distributed from O-DU to O-RU via direct connection between O-DU site and O-RU site. O-DU is acting as a master and directly synchronizes O-RU.
DoS attacks against the master clock: There are two scenarios:
1.     Scenario 1: One O-RU is served by O-DU, therefore only one O-RU is affected. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
2.     Scenario 2: Multiple O-RUs are served by O-DU, therefore all those O-RUs are affected as the connection between O-DU and O-RU is point-to-point. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
Configuration LLS-C2
In LLS-C2, the network timing is distributed from O-DU to O-RU between O-DU sites and O-RU sites. One or more Ethernet switches are allowed in the fronthaul network. O-DU acting as master to distribute network timing toward O-RU.
DoS attacks against the master clock within the O-DU may affect one or multiple O-RUs. In this configuration, a neighbor O-DU could act a backup and play the role of a master to distribute network timing to all the RUs belonging to the affected O-DU by reconfiguring the network of switches. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
Configuration LLS-C3
Frequency and time distribution is made by the fronthaul network itself (not by the O-DU). One or more PRTC/T-GM are implemented in the fronthaul network to distribute network timing toward O-DU and O-RU.
DoS attacks against the master clock within the fronthaul network may affect multiple O-DUs with their related O-RUs. Consequently, the severity level is ‘High’.
Configuration LLS-C4
Local PRTC timing that provides time synchronization to the O-RU (it could be embedded in the O-RU).
DoS attacks against the master clock may affect only one O-RU. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
According to what we described in the here above two notes, T-SPLANE-01 has been split in Table 9-4 according to the Clock Model and Synchronization Topology configurations C1, C2, C3, and C4.
NOTE: Adverse impacts: This factor depends on the normative O-RAN security requirements in the security requirements specification. For a threat without any requirement in front of it, the adverse impacts level is High. It is Medium or Low for a threat with related security requirements (see column ‘Assupltions’) helping in reducing its impact.
Determination of likelihood level process
The process followed to determine the likelihood level resulting from threats that successfully exploit vulnerabilities is based on Table 9-2 which includes the relevant factors that are considered. For each factor, three levels ‘Low’, ‘Medium’ and ‘High’ are shown in Table 9-2 as green, yellow and red.
Table 9-2 defines what “low,” “medium” and “high” means.
The likelihood level is expressed by four factors as follows:
Adverse impacts: This factor depends on the existing normative O-RAN security requirements and controls. For example, the level is high in case no available O-RAN security requirements and controls in the O-RAN security specifications. In the risk assessment Table 9-4 in the column ‘Assumptions’, some of the agreed security controls by the O-RAN alliance have been stated for some threats as arguments for justifying the likelihood levels ‘Low’ or ‘Medium. This means that the likelihood level is estimated at Low’ or ‘Medium’, provided that the security controls are in place.
NOTE: This factor is used to determine the likelihood level for the most categories of threats. It is also used as a relevant factor for severity for some categories of threats, in particular the O-Cloud threats category.
Threat event initiation: This factor takes into consideration the capabilities that attackers possess and the potential entry points to exploit a vulnerability and initiate an attack. For example, it is high if an attack can be initiated from internet or untrusted network.
Exposure: This factor is related to the number of external interfaces and/or services that are exposed to an attacker.
Zero Trust Approach: Likelihood scoring considers a zero-trust architecture which protects against internal threat actors.  Likelihood scores are higher for a zero-trust architecture (ZTA) because internal threats should be considered in addition to external threats. In a ZTA it cannot be assumed that perimeter defense is sufficient.  As a result, scored Likelihood = Medium, at a minimum.   Reconnaissance type attacks can be scored Likelihood = High while damaging/availability attacks can be scored Likelihood = Medium.  The reason is that threat actors are less likely to perform damaging attacks that are quickly and easily detected. Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) typically move laterally in anonymous fashion to prevent detection while providing reconnaissance (see O-RAN.SFG.Non-RT-RIC-Security-TR-v01.00).
Table 9-2 : Likelihood rating
Evaluation of the risks process
The following risk assessment matrix is used to assess the risk score. The matrix takes as input two estimated qualitative inputs: (i) likelihood and (ii) the severity. One axis representing the probability of a risk scenario occurring and the other representing the damage it will cause (Severity). In the middle, you have scores based on their combined totals.
Using this formula RISK= Severity x Likelihood by a simple multiply the severity and likelihood scores to obtain the final risk score as shown in Table 9-3.
For example, if the estimated likelihood of a threat is low and the corresponding severity is high, then the risk is medium.
Table 9-3 : Risk assessment matrix
Risk assessment output
The following is the risk assessment output table which illustrates the different threats along with their impacts, the type of loss, the perceived severity/likelihood levels and the risk scoring.
Table 9-4 : Risk Assessment
Annex: Change history/Change request (history)