ORAN.WG3.E2SM-RC-R003-v04.00
\\
Technical Specification
O-RAN Work Group 3 (WG-3)
Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller
E2 Service Model (E2SM), RAN Control
Copyright © 2023 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.
The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this specification in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material of this specification for your personal use, or copy the material of this specification for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.
O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V., Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany
Register of Associations, Bonn VR 11238, VAT ID DE321720189
"© 2019. 3GPP™ TSs and TRs are the property of ARIB, ATIS, CCSA, ETSI, TSDSI, TTA and TTC who jointly own the copyright in them. They are subject to further modifications and are therefore provided to you "as is" for information purposes only. Further use is strictly prohibited."
"© 2020. 3GPP™ TSs and TRs are the property of ARIB, ATIS, CCSA, ETSI, TSDSI, TTA and TTC who jointly own the copyright in them. They are subject to further modifications and are therefore provided to you "as is" for information purposes only. Further use is strictly prohibited."
Contents
Foreword
This Technical Specification (TS) has been produced by WG3 of the O-RAN Alliance.
The contents of the present document are subject to continuing work within O-RAN and may change following formal O-RAN approval. Should the O-RAN Alliance modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN with an identifying change of version date and an increase in version number as follows:
version xx.yy.zz
where:
xx:	the first digit-group is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have xx=01).  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
yy:	the second digit-group is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
zz:	the third digit-group included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process. External versions never include the third digit-group.  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
Modal verbs terminology
In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the O-RAN Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).
"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in O-RAN deliverables except when used in direct citation.
1	Scope
The present document specifies the E2 Service Model (E2SM) for the Near RT RIC RAN Control interaction.
2	References
[1]	3GPP TR 21.905: “Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications”.
[2]	O-RAN Working Group 3, Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller, Architecture & E2 General Aspects and Principles (E2GAP)
[3]	ORAN Working Group 3, Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller, E2 Application Protocol (E2AP).
[4]	O-RAN Working Group 3, Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller, E2 Service Model (E2SM)
[5]	3GPP TR 25.921: "Guidelines and principles for protocol description and error handling".
[6]	ITU-T Recommendation X.680 (2002-07): "Information technology – Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Specification of basic notation".
[7]	ITU-T Recommendation X.681 (2002-07): "Information technology – Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Information object specification".
[8]	ITU-T Recommendation X.691 (2002-07): "Information technology - ASN.1 encoding rules - Specification of Packed Encoding Rules (PER) "
[9]	Reserved
[10]	TS 38.410: “NG-RAN; NG general aspects and principles”.
[11]	TS 38.413: “NG-RAN; NG Application Protocol (NGAP)”.
[12]	Reserved
[13]	TS 36.413: “E-UTRAN; S1 Application Protocol (S1AP)”.
[14]	TS 38.420: “NG-RAN; Xn general aspects and principles”.
[15]	TS 38.423: “NG-RAN; Xn Application Protocol (XnAP)”.
[16]	TS 36.420: “E-UTRAN; X2 general aspects and principles”.
[17]	TS 36.423: “E-UTRAN; X2 Application Protocol (X2AP)”.
[18]	TS 38.470: “NG-RAN; F1 general aspects and principles”.
[19] 	TS 38.473: “NG-RAN; F1 Application Protocol (F1AP)”.
[20]	TS 38.460: “NG-RAN; E1 general aspects and principles”.
[21]	TS 37.483: “NG-RAN; E1 Application Protocol (E1AP)”.
[22]	TS 38.331: “NR; Radio Resource Control (RRC) Protocol Specification”.
[23]		TS 36.331: “E-UTRA; Radio Resource Control (RRC) Protocol Specification”.
[24]	TS 38.323: “NR; Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) specification”.
[25]	TS 38.322: “NR; Radio Link Control (RLC) protocol specification”.
[26]	TS 38.321: “NR; Medium Access Control (MAC) protocol specification”.
[27]	TS 25.321: “Medium Access Control (MAC) protocol specification”.
[28]	TS 28.552: “Management and orchestration 5G performance measurements”.
[29]	Reserved
[30]	IETF RFC 5905 (2010-06): “Network Time Protocol Version 4: Protocol and Algorithms Specification”
[31]	TS 37.340: “E-UTRA and NR Multiconnectivity Stage 2”.
[32]	O-RAN Working Group 3, Use Case Requirements (UCR)
[33]	O-RAN Working Group 1, Massive MIMO Use Cases Technical Report
3	Definitions and Abbreviations
3.1	Definitions
E2 Node: as defined in E2GAP [2].
RAN Function: as defined in E2GAP [2]
E2 Service Model: The description of the Services exposed by a specific RAN function within an E2 node over the E2 interface towards the Near-RT RIC.
SpCell: as defined in TS 37.340 [31].
3.2	Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the following abbreviations apply.
O-CU 	O-RAN Central Unit
O-CU-CP	O-RAN Central Unit – Control Plane
O-CU-UP	O-RAN Central Unit – User Plane
O-DU	O-RAN Distributed Unit
Near-RT RIC	Near-real-time RAN Intelligent Controller
RC	RAN Control
4	General
4.1	Procedure Specification Principles
The principle for specifying the procedure logic is to specify the functional behavior of the terminating node exactly and completely. Any rule that specifies the behavior of the originating node shall be possible to be verified with information that is visible within the system.
The following specification principles have been applied for the procedure text in clause 8:
-	The procedure text discriminates between:
1)	Functionality which "shall" be executed.
The procedure text indicates that the receiving node "shall" perform a certain function Y under a certain condition. If the receiving node supports procedure X but cannot perform functionality Y requested in the REQUEST message of a Class 1 EP, the receiving node shall respond with the message used to report unsuccessful outcome for this procedure, containing an appropriate cause value.
2)	Functionality which "shall, if supported" be executed.
The procedure text indicates that the receiving node "shall, if supported," perform a certain function Y under a certain condition. If the receiving node supports procedure X, but does not support functionality Y, the receiving node shall proceed with the execution of the EP, possibly informing the requesting node about the not supported functionality.
-	Any required inclusion of an optional IE in a response message is explicitly indicated in the procedure text. If the procedure text does not explicitly indicate that an optional IE shall be included in a response message, the optional IE shall not be included. For requirements on including Criticality Diagnostics IE, see clause 10.
4.2	Forwards and Backwards Compatibility
The forwards and backwards compatibility of the protocol is assured by a mechanism where all current and future messages, and IEs or groups of related IEs, include ID and criticality fields that are coded in a standard format that will not be changed in the future. These parts can always be decoded regardless of the standard version.
4.3	Specification Notations
For the purposes of the present document, the following notations apply:
Service	when referring to a Service in the specification the SERVICE NAME is written with upper case characters and in bold followed by the word "service", e.g. REPORT service.
Procedure	When referring to an elementary procedure in the specification the Procedure Name is written with the first letters in each word in upper case characters followed by the word "procedure", e.g. Handover Preparation procedure.
Message	When referring to a message in the specification the MESSAGE NAME is written with all letters in upper case characters followed by the word "message", e.g. HANDOVER REQUEST message.
IE	When referring to an information element (IE) in the specification the Information Element Name is written with the first letters in each word in upper case characters and all letters in Italic font followed by the abbreviation "IE", e.g. E-RAB ID IE.
Value of an IE	When referring to the value of an information element (IE) in the specification the "Value" is written as it is specified in the specification enclosed by quotation marks, e.g. "Value".
4.4	Identifiers
For the purposes of the present document, the following identifiers are defined:
Style Type	The identifier used to nominate a specific approach or Style used to exposing a given RIC Service (REPORT, INSERT, CONTROL and POLICY).  The same E2SM may support more than one Style for each RIC Service.
Format Type	The identifier used to nominate a specific formatting approach used to encode one of the E2AP IEs defined in this E2SM.  The same E2SM may support more than one encoding Formats for each E2AP IE and each E2AP IE message encoding Format may be used by one or more RIC Service Styles.
5	E2SM Services
As defined in E2 General Aspects and Principles [1], a given RAN Function offers a set of services to be exposed over the E2 (REPORT, INSERT, CONTROL and/or POLICY) using E2AP [3] defined procedures. Each of the E2AP Procedures listed in table 5-1 contains specific E2 Node RAN Function dependent Information Elements (IEs).
Table 5-1: Relationship RAN Function specific E2AP Information elements and E2AP Procedures
All of these RAN Function specific E2AP IEs are defined in E2AP [3] as “OCTET STRING”.
The purpose of this specification is to define the contents of these fields for the specific RAN function “RAN Control (RC)”.
6	RAN Function Service Model Description
6.1	RAN Function Overview
For the purposes of this E2 Service Model, E2SM-RC, the E2 Node terminating the E2 Interface is assumed to host one or more instances of the RAN Function “RAN Control” which performs the following functionalities:
-	E2 REPORT services used to expose RAN control and UE context related information
-	E2 INSERT services used to suspend RAN control related call processes
-	E2 CONTROL services used to resume or initiate RAN control related call processes, modify RAN configuration and/or E2 service-related UE context information
-	E2 POLICY services used to modify the behaviour of RAN control related processes
-	E2 QUERY services used to request and retrieve RAN and/or UE related information
This E2SM specification provides a set of RAN Function exposure services described in clause 6.2 and has been prepared with the assumption that the same E2SM may be used to describe either a single RAN Function in the E2 Node handling all RAN control related call processes or more than one RAN Function in the E2 Node with each instance handling a subset of the RAN control related call processes on the E2 Node.
6.2	RAN Function exposure services
6.2.1	REPORT service
The “RAN Control” RAN Function provides selective support of the following REPORT services:
-	Copy of Complete message (from Network Interface or RRC), used for monitoring POLICY services, data gathering (to populate the Near-RT RIC UE-NIB and/or ML services data pipeline), etc.
-	Call process outcome with associated information on UE context and/or RAN status information, used for monitoring [CONTROL and] POLICY services, data gathering (to populate the Near-RT RIC UE-NIB and/or ML services data pipeline), etc.
-	E2 Node Information and Cell related Information, used for monitoring of E2 Node and Cell configuration changes, triggering POLICY deletion, changing notifications (to reset Near-RT RIC optimization services), etc..
-	UE Information, used for monitoring of UE information changes, triggering E2 Control, location tracking, etc.
NOTE: Only the UE with user consent can be configured to report location information.
6.2.2	INSERT service
The “RAN Control” RAN Function provides selective support of the following INSERT services:
Fundamental level:
-	Radio Bearer Control request, used for requesting the RIC to control DRB QoS modification, QoS flow to DRB (re)mapping, Logical channel (re)configuration, Radio bearer admission control, Split bearer and PDCP duplication control, etc.
-	Radio Resource Allocation Control request, used for requesting the RIC to control Discontinuous Reception (DRX), Scheduling request (SR), Semi-Persistent Scheduling (SPS), Configured Grant, Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) table, Slice level PRB quota, etc.
-	Connected Mode Mobility Control request, used for requesting the RIC to control operations of Handover (HO), Conditional handover (CHO), Dual Active Protocol Stack (DAPS) HO, etc.
-	Radio Access Control request, used for requesting the RIC to control parameters related to RACH back-off, RRC connection reject, RRC connection release, Access barring, UE admission, etc.
-	Dual Connectivity (DC) Control request, used for requesting the RIC to control operations of Dual Connectivity (DC) including Change of bearer termination point (MN or SN) and/or bearer types, etc.
-	Carrier Aggregation (CA) Control request, used for requesting the RIC to control operations of Carrier Aggregation (CA) involving secondary cell re-selection.
-	Idle Mode Mobility Control request, used for requesting the RIC to control intra-frequency, inter-frequency, inter-RAT cell reselection priority, idle timers, etc.
Integrated level:
-	Multiple Actions Control request, used for requesting the RIC to command multiple actions of the selected fundamental level INSERT services.
6.2.3	CONTROL service
The “RAN Control” RAN Function provides selective support of the following CONTROL services:
Fundamental level:
-	Radio Bearer Control, used for DRB QoS modification, QoS flow to DRB (re)mapping, Logical channel (re)configuration, Radio bearer admission control, Split bearer and PDCP duplication control, etc.
-	Radio Resource Allocation Control, used to control Discontinuous Reception (DRX), Scheduling request (SR), Semi-Persistent Scheduling (SPS), Configured Grant, Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) table, Slice level PRB quota, etc.
-	Connected Mode Mobility Control, used to control operations of Handover (HO), Conditional handover (CHO), Dual Active Protocol Stack (DAPS) HO, etc.
-	Radio Access Control, used for modification of RACH back-off, RRC connection reject, RRC connection release, Access barring, UE admission, etc.
-	Dual Connectivity (DC) Control, used to control operations of Dual Connectivity (DC) including Change of bearer termination point (MN or SN) and/or bearer types, etc.
-	Carrier Aggregation (CA) Control, used to control operations of Carrier Aggregation (CA).
-	Idle Mode Mobility Control, used for modification of intra-frequency, inter-frequency, inter-RAT cell reselection priority, idle timers, etc.
-	UE to RAN UE group assignment, used to support POLICY services.
-	Measurement Report (MR) Configuration Control, used to control configuration of RRC measurement objects, reporting objects, etc.
Integrated level:
-	Multiple Actions Control, used to command multiple actions of the selected fundamental level CONTROL services in one message.
6.2.4	POLICY service
The “RAN Control” RAN Function provides selective support of the following POLICY services:
-	Radio Bearer Policy, used to modify the behaviour of call processes related to DRB QoS control, QoS flow to DRB mapping, Logical channel configuration, Radio bearer admission control, Split bearer and PDCP duplication control, etc.
-	Radio Resource Allocation Policy, used to modify the behaviour of call processes related to DRX, SR, SPS, Configured Grant, CQI table, Slice level PRB quota, etc.
-	Connected Mode Mobility Policy, used to modify the behaviour of call processes related to HO, CHO, DAPS HO, etc. for both serving and target RAN nodes.
-	Radio Access Policy, used to modify the behaviour of call processes related to RACH back-off, RRC connection reject, RRC connection release, Access barring, UE admission, etc.
-	Dual Connectivity (DC) Policy, used to modify the behaviour of call processes related to DC related operations for both master and secondary RAN nodes, Change of bearer termination point (MN or SN) and/or bearer types, etc.
-	Carrier Aggregation (CA) Policy, used to modify the behaviour of call processes related to CA related operations for both primary and secondary cells.
-	Idle Mode Mobility Policy, used to modify the behaviour of call processes related to intra-frequency, inter-frequency, inter-RAT cell reselection priority, inactivity timers, etc.
-	Measurement Report (MR) Configuration Policy, used to configure policy for RRC measurement objects, reporting objects, etc.
6.2.5	QUERY service
The “RAN Control” RAN Function provides support of the following QUERY services:
-	E2 Node related Information retrieval between Near-RT RIC and E2 Node for any data required at Near-RT RIC
-	UE related Information retrieval between Near-RT RIC and E2 Node for any data required at Near-RT RIC
6.3	REPORT service description
The E2SM-RC REPORT service requirements defined in Clause 6.2.1 are offered using a set of REPORT Styles.  All REPORT styles are implemented using a set of IEs for Action Definition, RIC Indication Header and RIC Indication Message and have specific Event Trigger approach. For each Report style, a single RAN Parameter table is used to specify the required information to be reported.
The following REPORT styles are supported:
-	Message copy: This REPORT style is initiated by “Message Event” Event Trigger and is used to report complete NI or RRC message along with UE associated information when the event trigger conditions are satisfied.
-	Call Process Outcome: This REPORT style is initiated by the corresponding "Call Process Breakpoint" Event Trigger and is used to report on the outcome of a call process providing information on current, and in certain cases previous, UE or E2 Node information depending upon the nature of the target call process.
-	E2 Node Information: This REPORT style is initiated by “E2 Node Information Change” Event Trigger and is used to report cell related and E2 Node related information upon event trigger conditions are satisfied.
-	UE information: This REPORT style is initiated by “UE Information Change” Event Trigger and is used to report UE related information and UE state variables upon the event trigger conditions are satisfied.
6.4	INSERT service description
The E2SM-RC INSERT service requirements defined in Clause 6.2.2 are offered using a set of INSERT Styles. Each style corresponds to a set of “INSERT Indications”, where each “INSERT Indication” deals with a specific functionality and has a set of associated RAN parameters, provided in a mapping table. All INSERT Service styles are implemented using a set of IEs that constitute “Action Definition”, “RIC Indication Header” and “RIC Indication Message” to deliver RAN Control-related INSERT services. Each INSERT service style is associated with a specific “Event Trigger” approach.  An “INSERT Indication” is used to request the RIC to control a functionality associated with the respective INSERT service style, and to set or modify the values of one or more associated RAN parameters.
As an example, upon the arrival of an RRC Measurement Report in the E2 node due to the occurrence of an A3 event pertaining to a UE (which constitutes the event trigger), the E2 node can send a message to the RIC using the “Connected Mode Mobility” INSERT service style and the “Handover Control Request” INSERT Indication along with the “target cell ID” parameter. This RIC should then accept/deny the “Handover Control Request”, and if it accepts, it should set the value of the “target cell ID” parameter and send a CONTROL action back to the RIC. Up until then, the E2 node suspends the ongoing call processing for the UE.
6.5	CONTROL service description
The E2SM-RC CONTROL service requirements defined in Clause 6.2.3 are offered using a set of CONTROL Styles. Each style corresponds to a set of “CONTROL Action”, where each “CONTROL Action” deals with a specific functionality and has a set of associated RAN parameters, provided in a mapping table. All CONTROL Service styles are implemented using a set of IEs constituting a “RIC Control Request Header” and a “RIC Control Request Message” to deliver RAN Control-related CONTROL services and the optional “RIC Control Outcome” to carry control process outcome information from the E2 Node. A “CONTROL Action” containing one or more RAN parameters and their associated values can either be sent from the RIC, either asynchronously to the E2 node or as a response to a previous “INSERT Indication” from the E2 node.
Referring to the previous example in Clause 6.4, the RIC sends a “CONTROL action” that accepts/denies the incoming “INSERT Indication” requesting for “Handover Control”, along with the value of the “Target Primary Cell”. As another example, the RIC can also asynchronously send a “CONTROL action” asking the E2 node to configure the UE in Carrier Aggregation mode and setup one or more secondary cells to the UE, whose values are assigned by the RIC via the “CONTROL action”.
6.6	POLICY service description
6.6.1	Overview
The E2SM-RC POLICY service requirements defined in Clause 6.2.4 are offered using a set of POLICY Styles.  Each style is implemented using multiple "Policy Approach" strategies, each with a specific methodology defined to use the E2AP IE "Action Definition" to deliver RAN Control related POLICY services.
The following Policy Approaches are defined:
-	Control: POLICY for a given Style and Action ID is defined as a single case of a specific Policy condition with the corresponding Policy Action defined using the same data structure as CONTROL which would be used to replace default RAN behaviour.
-	Offset: POLICY for a given Style and Action ID is defined as a set of different cases applicable for a range of different Policy conditions with the corresponding Policy Action defined using the dedicated data structure defined for POLICY which would be used to modify default RAN behaviour.
6.6.2	Policy approach "Control"
The “control” Policy Approach is similar to the CONTROL service, with static conditions and actions in the RIC Subscription used to select an appropriate CONTROL Action. When a set of Policy conditions are satisfied, then E2 Node is instructed to execute a Policy Action with a set of supplementary or default set of RAN parameters.
A single Policy Action shall be a result of execution of multiple policy conditions.
-	Each Policy Condition is defined using a combination of RAN Parameters and conditional tests associated with UE and Call process related information.
-	Each Policy Action is defined with a single Policy Action ID (command) which instructs E2 Node to perform a certain action when the conditions are satisfied. The Policy Action ID shall be supplemented with a set of RAN Parameters which may be used to provide information on default values to E2 Node. The Policy Decision indicates to the E2 Node, whether to accept or reject a RRM function, when the Policy conditions are met.
Examples include:
-	Connected mode mobility policy, Handover Execution: Message Arrival breakpoint event trigger is defined to initiate the Policy service. On the arrival of A3 Measurement Report, the Policy service kicks in. Policy service installs a set of Policy Conditions like RSRP > ‘x’ db + Target Node Load < ‘x’ value + Number of successful HO to target Node > ‘x’ value. When these Policy conditions are satisfied, then perform Policy Action - “Execute HO” defined in the CONTROL service in Clause 6.5. The Policy Action may be provided as a standalone Policy Action ID “Execute HO” without any RAN parameters. As an alternative, Policy Action “Execute HO” may be supplemented with default RAN parameters like Handover only QCI 5 and 9 bearers.
-	Carrier Aggregation Policy, CA Release decision: A call process breakpoint event trigger is defined to initiate the POLICY service. The call process breakpoint shall define conditions for Buffer occupancy. A call process breakpoint event shall be triggered when the Buffer Occupancy (BO) < ‘x’ KB. In this scenario, the event trigger satisfies the Policy condition. Hence there is no need to define a Policy condition in the Policy service, When the BO < ‘x’ KB kicks in, then Policy Action shall instruct E2 Node to “Release Scell”.
6.6.3	Policy Approach "Offset"
The "offset" Policy Approach is based on the design assumption that the Policy Action IE is used to carry one or more RAN Parameters that are used to modify default E2 Node behaviour via the addition of an "offset" to be applied to given target threshold or other parameter used in the target call process.
The applicable Policy Action is dependent upon a set of Policy Conditions and a given POLICY service may support one or more Policy conditions and so provide a targeted Policy Action for a range of different specific cases, each defined using a unique Policy condition where:
-	Each Policy Condition is defined using a combination of RAN Parameters and conditional tests associated with UE and Call process related information.  The first positive match in a list of Policy conditions is used to select the corresponding Policy Action.
-	Each Policy Action is defined using a list of RAN Parameters of data type INTEGER or REAL which may to used directly for default values of type INTEGER or REAL (i.e. Default+Offset) and indirectly to for default values of type ENUMERATED (i.e. select value in list that is Offset before or after default value).
Examples include:
-	Connected mode mobility policy, Handover decision: A call process breakpoint event trigger is defined to initiate the POLICY service from within the call process handling UE measurement reports related to handover decisions for a specific target Slice and primary cell currently subject to Traffic Steering guidance.  The Policy conditions list of RAN Parameters supports the definition of different A3 measurement threshold criteria offset values to be applied to UEs with a specific combination of slice ID, active QoS bearers, velocity and throughput and subject to overall E2 Node load and cell level load balancing requirements.  Handover is accepted if the reported A3 measurement is greater than the default A3 measurement threshold+offset.
-	Carrier Aggregation Policy, CA release decision: A call process breakpoint event trigger is defined to initiate the POLICY service from within the call process related to Carrier Aggregation (CA) release decisions for a specific target Slice currently subject to QoE guidance.  The Policy conditions list of RAN Parameters supports the definition of different CA release threshold criteria offset values to be applied to UEs with a specific combination of slice ID, active QoS bearers, velocity and throughput and subject to overall E2 Node load and cell level load balancing requirements.  CA release is initiated if the UE throughput is less than the default UE throughput threshold+offset.
6.7	QUERY service description
The E2SM-RC QUERY service requirements defined in Clause 6.2.5 are offered using a set of QUERY Styles.  All QUERY styles are implemented using a set of IEs for RIC Query Header, RIC Query Definition and RIC Query Outcome. For each Query style, a single RAN Parameter table is used to specify the required information to be requested and responded.
7	RAN Function Description
7.1	Description
The E2AP [3] procedures E2 Setup and RIC Service Update are used to transport the RAN Function Description.
For the specific RAN Function, the RAN Function Definition IE shall report the following information:
-	RAN Function name along with associated information on E2SM definition
-	Event trigger styles list along with the corresponding encoding type for each associated E2AP IE.
-	RIC REPORT Service styles list along with the corresponding encoding type for each associated E2AP IE.
-	RIC INSERT Service styles list along with the corresponding encoding type for each associated E2AP IE.
-	RIC CONTROL Service styles list along with the corresponding encoding type for each associated E2AP IE.
-	RIC POLICY Service styles list along with the corresponding encoding type for each associated E2AP IE.
-	RIC QUERY Service styles list along with the corresponding encoding type for each associated E2AP IE.
7.2	RAN Function name
RAN Function Short Name “ORAN-E2SM-RC”
RAN Function name description “RAN Control”
RAN Function Instance, required when and if E2 Node exposes more than one instance of a RAN Function based on this E2SM.
7.3	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE styles
7.3.1	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style list
7.3.2	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style 1: Message Event
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style is used to detect a specific Network Interface or RRC message event in E2 Node. The detection can be based on only for incoming or outgoing message. The E2 Node can also be configured to detect multiple messages simultaneously and to trigger only when all the configured message events happen or for any logical combination of message events.
Each message event configured can be further conditioned to be associated only for a certain UE or group of UEs as indicated by the Associated UE Info IE if included, or only for some specific UE events defined in Clause 8.1.5 as indicated by the Associated UE Event IE if included. In case that the Global Associated UE Info IE is included, the information is applied uniformly to all the message events configured and the IE shall override any Associated UE Info IE included for some message events.
For each message event configured, Event Trigger Condition ID is assigned so that E2 Node can reply to Near-RT RIC in the RIC INDICATION message to inform which event(s) are the cause for triggering.
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style uses RIC Event Trigger Definition IE Format 1 (9.2.1.1.1).
7.3.3	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style 2: Call Process Breakpoint
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style is used to detect a call process in E2 Node based on a specified call process identifier and breakpoint identifier. The call process and breakpoint configured for event triggering can also be conditioned to be associated with a certain E2 Node related information.
The following table specifies the supported call process types, call breakpoints, the associated RAN Parameters for possible E2 Node related conditioning for event triggering, as well as the supported INSERT or POLICY services.
Table 7.3.3-1: RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style 2 – Supported Call Processes and associated RAN Parameters
Each event configured can be further conditioned to be associated only for a certain UE or group of UEs as indicated by the Associated UE Info IE if included.
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style uses E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.1.2).
7.3.4	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style 3: E2 Node Information Change
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style is used to detect E2 Node related information change from the subscribed E2 Node. The E2 Node can also be configured to detect multiple changes simultaneously and to trigger only when all the configured changes happen or for any logical combination of the configured changes.
In this version of E2SM-RC specification, the following E2 Node related information changes are supported for event triggering.
Table 7.3.4-1: RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style 3 – Supported E2 Node information changes
Each E2 Node information change configured can also be conditioned to be associated with a specific cell or group of cells for event triggering, as indicated by the Associated Cell Info IE if included.
For each information change configured for event triggering, Event Trigger Condition ID is also assigned so that E2 Node can reply to Near-RT RIC in the RIC INDICATION message to inform which event(s) are the cause for triggering.
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style uses  E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.1.3).
7.3.5	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style 4: UE Information Change
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style is used to detect UE Context related information change from the subscribed E2 Node. The E2 Node can also be configured to detect multiple changes simultaneously and to trigger only when all the configured changes happen or for any logical combination of the configured changes.
In this version of E2SM-RC specification, the supported UE Context information changes for event triggering are
-	RRC state change
-	UE identifier change (based on UE ID defined in Clause 9.3.10)
-	RLC/PDCP state variable or MAC state variable change (based on RAN Parameters defined in Clauses 8.1.1.4 and 8.1.1.8)
-	L2 MAC scheduler-related changes (e.g. MIMO transmission mode state change for the UE, etc.)
-	UE context info change
For UE identifier change, the following cases are supported for event triggering.
Table 7.3.5-1: RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style 4 – Supported UE Information changes
The detection for each UE information change configured can be based on for any UEs, or only for a certain UE or group of UEs as indicated by the Associated UE Info IE if included.
For each information change configured, Event Trigger Condition ID is assigned so that E2 Node can reply to Near-RT RIC in the RIC INDICATION message to inform which event(s) are the cause for triggering.
This RIC Event Trigger Definition IE style uses E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 4 IE (9.2.1.1.4).
7.4	Supported RIC REPORT Services
7.4.1	REPORT Service style list
7.4.2	REPORT Service Style 1: Message Copy
7.4.2.1	REPORT Service Style description
This REPORT Service style provides the complete copy of a Network Interface or RRC message to be carried as a transparent container in the RIC Indication Message IE.
This REPORT service style may also be used to report UE and E2 Node specific information associated with the Network Interface/RRC messages as provided in Clause 8.2.1 RAN Parameters. Examples include reporting of UEID to Near-RT RIC when UE attaches to the E2 Node or when the UEID changes during Xn Handover, UE events like Secondary Cell addition, Arrival of A3 Measurement Report (see Clause 8.1.5 for the list of UE events).
This REPORT Service style is initiated by Event Trigger style 1: Message Event.
7.4.2.2	REPORT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
The Action Definition for this service style is used to request E2 Node to report a copy of NI and/or RRC message and may be used to report UE and E2 Node specific information. The action definition indicates which related UE and E2 Node information is to be reported along with the NI or RRC message that triggers this report service.
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 1 IE (9.2.1.2.1). The supported Parameters for this format are provided in Clause 8.2.1.
7.4.2.3	REPORT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.3.1)
7.4.2.4	REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
The REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE carries the complete Network Interface or RRC message as transparent containers. The RIC Indication Message IE may also carry UE and E2 Node specific information related to the Network Interface or RRC message as provided in Clause 8.2.1.
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.4.1). The supported Parameters for this message format are provided in Clause 8.2.1.
7.4.3	REPORT Service Style 2: Call Process Outcome
7.4.3.1	REPORT Service Style description
This REPORT Service style provides the outcome of a target call process related mechanism to be carried in the RIC Indication Message IE along with an associated RIC Indication Header IE providing information related event trigger conditions.
This REPORT Service style is initiated by Event Trigger style 2: Call Process Breakpoint.
7.4.3.2	REPORT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
The Action Definition for this service style is used to request an E2 Node to report call process outcome information including UE specific information. The Action Definition indicates which related UE information is to be reported related to the outcome of the event that triggers this report service.
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 1 IE (9.2.1.2.1). The supported Parameters for this message format are provided in Clause 8.2.2.
7.4.3.3	REPORT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.3.1).
7.4.3.4	REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
The REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE carries the UE specific information as a result of call process outcome. The Parameters supporting UE specific information is provided in Clause 8.2.2.
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 2 IE (9.2.1.4.2). The supported Parameters for this message format are provided in Clause 8.2.2.
7.4.4	REPORT Service Style 3: E2 Node Information.
7.4.4.1	REPORT Service Style description
This REPORT Service style provides essential RAN control related E2 Node Configuration Information that is not provided by E2AP [3]. The information is carried in the RIC Indication Message IE along with an associated RIC Indication Header IE providing information related event trigger conditions. The required information to be provided is controlled using the associated RIC Action Definition IE parameters.
This REPORT Service style provides information related to:
-	Serving Cell configuration
-	Neighbour Relation Information
whenever the corresponding event trigger for change in information content is satisfied. With every change in the information content of the Neighbour Relation Information, complete list of Neighbour relation table of the affected serving cell is sent to Near-RT RIC with indication on the modified information.
This REPORT Service style is initiated by Event Trigger style 3: E2 Node Information Change.
7.4.4.2	REPORT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
The Action Definition for this service style indicates the E2 Node related information requested by Near-RT RIC.
The REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 1 IE (9.2.1.2.1). The supported Parameters for this format are provided in Clause 8.2.3.
With every change in the information content of the Neighbour Relation Information pertaining to any cell in the E2 node (event trigger), the RIC Action Definition IE from the Near-RT RIC instructs the E2 node to send the complete list of Neighbour relation table for the impacted cell.
7.4.4.3	REPORT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.3.1).
7.4.4.4	REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
The REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE carries the E2 node related information as subscribed by the RIC Action Definition IE.
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 3 IE (9.2.1.4.3). The mapping of RAN parameters configured in the RIC Action Definition IE to the reported IEs in the RIC Indication Message IE Format 3 is provided in the semantics description of the IEs.
7.4.5	REPORT Service Style 4: UE Information
7.4.5.1	REPORT Service Style description
This REPORT Service style provides UE related Information. The information is carried in the RIC Indication Message IE along with an associated RIC Indication Header IE providing information related event trigger conditions. The required information to be provided is controlled using the associated RIC Action Definition IE parameters.
This REPORT Service style enables the E2 Node to report on a per UE basis:
-	L2 UE State variable values including
-	PDCP UE State variables
-	RLC UE State variables
-	MAC UE variables.
-	L3 UE State variable values including
-	RRC State
-	UE ID Information
-	UE ID change information including
-	Current UE ID
-	Old UE ID
-	NI or RRC message which triggered the UE ID change
-	UE context related information
This REPORT Service style is initiated by Event Trigger style 4: UE Information Change.
7.4.5.2	REPORT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
The Action Definition for this service style indicates the set of UE information parameters to be reported when event trigger to report is satisfied.
The REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 1 IE (9.2.1.2.1). The supported Parameters for this message format are provided in Clause 8.2.4.
7.4.5.3	REPORT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.3.1).
7.4.5.4	REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
The REPORT Service RIC Indication Message IE carries the requested UE related information.
This REPORT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 2 IE (9.2.1.4.2). The supported Parameters for this message format are provided in Clause 8.2.4.
7.5	Supported RIC INSERT Services
7.5.1	INSERT Service style list
Apart from the individual set of RAN parameters associated with each INSERT Service style and INSERT Indication name as described in Clauses 7.5.2 to 7.5.8, there is also a common set of RAN parameters for all INSERT service styles as elucidated in Clause 8.3.9.
7.5.2	INSERT Service Style 1: Radio Bearer Control Request
7.5.2.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism to initiate request to the RIC for controlling the functionalities of a radio bearer related process pertaining to a UE using the RIC Indication Message IE and associated RIC Indication Header IE. The E2 node sends a RIC Indication message to the near-RT RIC and the ongoing call process is suspended at the E2 node until the E2 node hears back from the RIC. The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used by the E2 node to match a RIC Control Request message to a RIC Indication message, following which the E2 node can resume the suspended call processing for the UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Request for DRB QoS Modification, to tune DRB level QoS related parameters to meet the QoS optimization targets.
-	Request for QoS Flow (re)mapping, to adjust the mapping relationship between QoS flows and DRBs.
-	Request for Logical channel (re)configuration
-	Request for Radio Bearer Admission Control, to configure DRB admission control such as reject or release may be applied.
-	Request for Split bearer and PDCP duplication control
This Insert style supports the following Indication services, each service listed below with a corresponding Indication ID. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are listed in the sections shown below.
7.5.2.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.2.3). This Insert style deals with the supported Indication services, each service with a corresponding Indication ID listed in Clause 7.5.2.1. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert RIC Indication service, are included by the E2 node in the RIC Indication message. Via the RIC Indication message, the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept or deny the request raised by the E2 node and to accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters by the RIC via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request message from the RIC.
7.5.2.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.3.2). The RIC Indication Header IE has the UE ID, the Insert Service Style ID and the corresponding Insert Indication ID.
7.5.2.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5 IE (9.2.1.4.5). The RIC Indication Message IE includes a sequence of associated RAN parameters for which the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node and accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters, via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request IE.
7.5.2.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.5.3	INSERT Service Style 2: Radio Resource Allocation Control Request
7.5.3.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism to initiate request to the RIC for controlling the allocation of radio resources to the UE using the RIC Indication Message IE and associated RIC Indication Header IE. The E2 node sends a RIC Indication message to the near-RT RIC and the ongoing call process is suspended at the E2 node until the E2 node hears back from the RIC. The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used by the E2 node to match a RIC Control Request message to a RIC Indication message, following which the E2 node can resume the suspended call processing for the UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Request for Discontinuous Reception (DRX) control
-	Request for Scheduling request (SR) control
-	Request for Semi-Persistent Scheduling (SPS) control
-	Request for Configured Grant control
-	Request for Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) table
-	Request for Slice level PRB quota
This Insert style supports the following Indication services, each service listed below with a corresponding Indication ID. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are listed in the sections shown below.
7.5.3.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.2.3). The Insert style deals with the supported Indication services, each service with a corresponding Indication ID listed in Clause 7.5.3.1. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are included by the E2 node in the RIC Indication message. Via the RIC Indication message, the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept or deny the request raised by the E2 node and to accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters by the RIC via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request message from the RIC.
7.5.3.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.3.2). The RIC Indication Header IE has the UE ID, the Insert Service Style ID and the corresponding Insert Indication ID.
7.5.3.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5 IE (9.2.1.4.5). The RIC Indication Message IE includes a sequence of associated RAN parameters for which the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node and accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters, via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request IE.
7.5.3.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.5.4	INSERT Service Style 3: Connected Mode Mobility Request
7.5.4.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism to initiate request for controlling the handover and mobility management of the UE using the RIC Indication Message IE and associated RIC Indication Header IE. The E2 node sends a RIC Indication message to the near-RT RIC and the ongoing call process is suspended at the E2 node until the E2 node hears back from the RIC. The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used by the E2 node to match a RIC Control Request message to a RIC Indication message, following which the E2 node can resume the suspended call processing for the UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Request for Handover (HO) initiation for a selected UE towards a target cell
-	Request for Conditional handover (CHO) initiation for a selected UE towards a list of candidate cell(s)
-	Request for Handover (HO) initiation with Dual Active Protocol Stack (DAPS) for a selected UE towards a target cell
This Insert style supports the following Indication services, each service listed below with a corresponding Indication ID. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are listed in the sections shown below.
7.5.4.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.2.3). The Insert style deals with the supported Indication services, each service with a corresponding Indication ID listed in Clause 7.5.4.1. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert RIC Indication service, are included by the E2 node in the RIC Indication message. Via the RIC Indication message, the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept or deny the request raised by the E2 node and to accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters by the RIC via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request message from the RIC.
7.5.4.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.3.2). The RIC Indication Header IE has the UE ID, the Insert Service Style ID and the corresponding Insert Indication ID.
7.5.4.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5 IE (9.2.1.4.5). The RIC Indication Message IE includes a sequence of associated RAN parameters for which the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node and accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters, via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request IE.
7.5.4.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.5.5	INSERT Service Style 4: Radio Access Control Request
7.5.5.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism to initiate request for controlling the radio access of the UE using the RIC Indication Message IE and associated RIC Indication Header IE. The E2 node sends a RIC Indication message to the near-RT RIC and the ongoing call process is suspended at the E2 node until the E2 node hears back from the RIC. The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used by the E2 node to match a RIC Control Request message to a RIC Indication message, following which the E2 node can resume the suspended call processing for the UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Request for configuring RACH back-off
-	Request for UE admission
-	Request for RRC connection reject
-	Request for RRC connection release Request for Access barring
This Insert style supports the following Indication services, each service listed below with a corresponding Indication ID. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are listed in the sections shown below.
7.5.5.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.2.3). The Insert style deals with the supported Indication services, each service with a corresponding Indication ID listed in Clause 7.5.5.1. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are included by the E2 node in the RIC Indication message. Via the RIC Indication message, the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept or deny the request raised by the E2 node and to accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters by the RIC via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request message from the RIC.
7.5.5.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.3.2). The RIC Indication Header IE has the UE ID, the Insert Service Style ID and the corresponding Insert Indication ID.
7.5.5.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5 IE (9.2.1.4.5). The RIC Indication Message IE includes a sequence of associated RAN parameters for which the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node and accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters, via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request IE.
7.5.5.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.5.6	INSERT Service Style 5: Dual Connectivity Control Request
7.5.6.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism to initiate request for controlling the dual connectivity of the UE using the RIC Indication Message IE and associated RIC Indication Header IE. The E2 node sends a RIC Indication message to the near-RT RIC and the ongoing call process is suspended at the E2 node until the E2 node hears back from the RIC. The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used by the E2 node to match a RIC Control Request message to a RIC Indication message, following which the E2 node can resume the suspended call processing for the UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Request for Dual connectivity (EN-DC, MR-DC or NR-NR DC) initiation for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell (PScell)
-	Request for Secondary cell change for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell (PScell)
-	Request for Dual connectivity (EN-DC, MR-DC or NR-NR DC) modification for a selected UE
-	Request for Dual connectivity (EN-DC, MR-DC or NR-NR DC) release initiation for a selected UE
-	Request for Change of bearer termination point (MN or SN) and/or bearer types for a selected UE
This Insert style supports the following Indication services, each service listed below with a corresponding Indication ID. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are listed in the sections shown below.
7.5.6.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.2.3). The Insert style deals with the supported Indication services, each service with a corresponding Indication ID listed in Clause 7.5.6.1. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are included by the E2 node in the RIC Indication message. Via the RIC Indication message, the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept or deny the request raised by the E2 node and to accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters by the RIC via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request message from the RIC.
7.5.6.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.3.2). The RIC Indication Header IE has the UE ID, the Insert Service Style ID and the corresponding Insert Indication ID.
7.5.6.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5 IE (9.2.1.4.5). The RIC Indication Message IE includes a sequence of associated RAN parameters for which the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node and accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters, via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request IE.
7.5.6.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.5.7	INSERT Service Style 6: Carrier Aggregation Control Request
7.5.7.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism to initiate request for controlling the carrier aggregation of the UE using the RIC Indication Message IE and associated RIC Indication Header IE. The E2 node sends a RIC Indication message to the near-RT RIC and the ongoing call process is suspended at the E2 node until the E2 node hears back from the RIC. The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used by the E2 node to match a RIC Control Request message to a RIC Indication message, following which the E2 node can resume the suspended call processing for the UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Request for Carrier Aggregation (CA) initiation for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell or cells
-	Request for Carrier Aggregation (CA) modification for a selected UE, or Secondary cell change for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell or cells
-	Request for Carrier Aggregation (CA) release initiation for a selected UE
This Insert style supports the following Indication services, each service listed below with a corresponding Indication ID. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are listed in the sections shown below.
7.5.7.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.2.3). The Insert style deals with the supported Indication services, each service with a corresponding Indication ID listed in Clause 7.5.7.1. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are included by the E2 node in the RIC Indication message. Via the RIC Indication message, the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept or deny the request raised by the E2 node and to accordingly, set the values for the associated RAN parameters by the RIC via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request message from the RIC.
7.5.7.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.3.2). The RIC Indication Header IE has the UE ID, the Insert Service Style ID and the corresponding Insert Indication ID.
7.5.7.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5 IE (9.2.1.4.5). The RIC Indication Message IE includes a sequence of associated RAN parameters for which the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node and accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters, via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request IE.
7.5.7.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.5.8	INSERT Service Style 7: Idle Mode Mobility Control Request
7.5.8.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism to initiate request for controlling the idle mode mobility of the UE using the RIC Indication Message IE and associated RIC Indication Header IE. The E2 node sends a RIC Indication message to the near-RT RIC and the ongoing call process is suspended at the E2 node until the E2 node hears back from the RIC. The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used by the E2 node to match a RIC Control Request message to a RIC Indication message, following which the E2 node can resume the suspended call processing for the UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Intra-frequency, inter-frequency, inter-RAT cell reselection priority
-	Idle timers
This Insert style supports the following Indication services, each service listed below with a corresponding Indication ID. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are listed in the sections shown below.
7.5.8.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE (9.2.1.2.3). The Insert style deals with the supported Indication services, each service with a corresponding Indication ID listed in Clause 7.5.8.1. The RAN parameters, associated with each Insert Indication service, are included by the E2 node in the RIC Indication message. Via the RIC Indication message, the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept or deny the request raised by the E2 node and to accordingly, set the values for the associated RAN parameters by the RIC via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request message from the RIC.
7.5.8.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.3.2). The RIC Indication Header IE has the UE ID, the Insert Service Style ID and the corresponding Insert Indication ID.
7.5.8.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5 IE (9.2.1.4.5). The RIC Indication Message IE includes a sequence of associated RAN parameters for which the E2 node seeks the near-RT RIC to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node or accordingly set the values for the associated RAN parameters, via the control action in the ensuing RIC Control Request IE.
7.5.8.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.5.9	INSERT Service Style 255: Multiple Actions Control Request
7.5.9.1	INSERT Service Style description
This INSERT Service style provides a mechanism which contains multiple Insert Indication actions of the selected fundamental level INSERT Service style(s), in order to initiate request to the Near-RT RIC for controlling multiple actions of the supporting functionalities related to the corresponding fundamental level CONTROL Service style(s). If at least one of the embedded Insert Indications is not admitted by E2 node, then the E2 node shall declare the INSERT Action as failed.
7.5.9.2	INSERT Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses the E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 4 IE (9.2.1.2.4).
For each Insert Indication action, the corresponding Insert Indication ID IE and the associated RAN parameters follow the definitions of the selected fundamental level INSERT Service style indicated by the Requested Insert Style IE.
7.5.9.3	INSERT Service RIC Indication Header IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 3 IE (9.2.1.3.3).
The RIC Indication Header IE may contain the UE ID IE, to indicate to the Near-RT RIC that this INSERT indication is only for that specific UE.
7.5.9.4	INSERT Service RIC Indication Message IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 6 IE (9.2.1.4.6).
For each Insert Indication action, the corresponding Insert Indication ID IE and the associated RAN parameters follow the definitions of the selected fundamental level INSERT Service style indicated by the Indicated Insert Style IE.
7.5.9.5	INSERT Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This INSERT Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6	Supported RIC CONTROL Services
7.6.1	CONTROL Service Style Types
Each of the Control Service styles 1-10 listed above points to adopt the following common features:
-	Control Action ID: The index ID for the individual control action under a given Control Service style.
-	Control Action Name: Indicates the functionality of the E2 node which is controlled by Near-RT RIC
-	Control Action Description: Describes the control action and functionality of the receiving E2 Node.
-	Associated RAN parameters: Identifies the RAN parameters to be controlled by Near-RT RIC pertaining to the given control action and used in the optional RIC Control Outcome to carry information.
The Control Service style 255 supports multiple parallel actions configured per RIC Control Request message by reusing the control actions and the associated RAN parameters defined in the selected fundamental level Control Service style(s).
The details of the individual Control Service styles are provided in subsequent sections.
The CONTROL Service supports UE-specific control actions and UE group-specific control actions. In the case of a UE group-based control action, the control action is defined for a group of UEs, and the individual entities of each UE (such as DRBs, QoS flows, etc.) in the group that match the entity filter condition, shall be subject to the control action.
7.6.2	CONTROL Service Style 1: Radio Bearer Control
7.6.2.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate or resume a radio bearer control related process using the RIC Control Message IE and associated RIC Control Header IE and the optional RIC Call Process ID IE used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT service. The corresponding INSERT service is service style 1 covered in Clause 7.5.2.
Applications of this service include:
-	DRB QoS Modification, to tune DRB level QoS related parameters to meet the QoS optimization targets.
-	QoS Flow (re)mapping, to adjust the mapping relationship between QoS flows and DRBs.
-	Logical channel (re)configuration
-	Radio Bearer Admission Control, to configure DRB admission control such as reject or release may be applied
-	Split bearer and PDCP duplication control
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.2.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID, the Control Action ID IE and the RIC Control Decision IE that indicates whether the RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
For UE group-based CONTROL action, this CONTROL style uses the E2SM-RC Control Header Format 3 IE (9.2.1.6.3), where the RIC Control Header IE has the UE Group ID IE for identifying the UE group, the UE Group Definition IE for defining the UE group, along with the RIC Style Type IE and the Control Action ID IE.
7.6.2.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style, controlled by the near-RT RIC along with the values for these parameters, as set by the RIC.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
If there is a previous INSERT Indication Request to the RIC, then the corresponding Control Action ID used by the RIC for the ensuing CONTROL Request message is the one that matches the Insert Indication ID, among the ones provided in the table shown in Clause 7.6.2.1.  It is to be noted that the control action “Radio admission control” (corresponding to control action ID 4) is used only as a response to an incoming INSERT indication with the corresponding service style and indication request ID and cannot be used asynchronously without a previous INSERT indication.
For UE group-based CONTROL action, this CONTROL style uses the E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3 IE (9.2.1.7.3). The RIC Control Message IE includes the list of filter definitions for identifying the relevant RAN entities of the UE group, given by the Entity Filter Definition IE in the List of entity filters IE, along with the identifier of the entity filter given by the Entity Filter ID IE, for which the control action is applicable. The sequence of RAN parameters controlled by the Near-RT RIC for the entities of the UEs in the group, corresponding to each entity filter, is given by the List of RAN control parameters for the matching entities IE.
7.6.2.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contains identifier used by the Near-RT RIC to allow the RAN Function to match the outgoing INSERT Service message with a subsequent incoming CONTROL Service message.
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6.2.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a transparent container that is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message. However, this does not reflect the outcome of the call processing upon receiving the message.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.8.1).
7.6.3	CONTROL Service Style 2: Radio Resource Allocation Control
7.6.3.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate or resume a radio resource allocation control related process using the RIC Control Message IE and associated RIC Control Header IE and the optional RIC Call Process ID IE used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT service.  The corresponding INSERT service is service style 2 covered in Clause 7.5.3.
Applications of this service include:
-	Discontinuous Reception (DRX) control
-	Scheduling request (SR) control
-	Semi-Persistent Scheduling (SPS) control
-	Configured Grant control
-	Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) table
-	Slice level PRB quota
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.3.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID, the Control Action ID IE and the RIC Control Decision IE that indicates whether the RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.3.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style, controlled by the near-RT RIC along with the values for these parameters, as set by the RIC.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
If there is a previous INSERT Indication Request to the RIC, then the corresponding Control Action ID used by the RIC for the ensuing CONTROL Request message is the one that matches the Insert Indication ID, among the ones provided in the table shown in Clause 7.6.3.1.
7.6.3.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contains identifier used by the Near-RT RIC to allow the RAN Function to match the outgoing INSERT Service message with a subsequent incoming CONTROL Service message.
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6.3.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a transparent container that is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message. However, this does not reflect the outcome of the call processing upon receiving the message.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.8.1).
7.6.4	CONTROL Service Style 3: Connected Mode Mobility
7.6.4.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate or resume a connected mode mobility control related process using the RIC Control Message IE and associated RIC Control Header IE and the optional RIC Call Process ID IE used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT service. The corresponding INSERT service is service style 3 covered in Clause 7.5.4.
Applications of this service include:
-	Handover (HO) initiation for a selected UE towards a target cell
-	Conditional handover (CHO) initiation for a selected UE towards a list of candidate cell(s)
-	Handover (HO) initiation with Dual Active Protocol Stack (DAPS) for a selected UE towards a target cell
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.4.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID, the Control Action ID IE and the RIC Control Decision IE that indicates whether the RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.4.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style, controlled by the near-RT RIC along with the values for these parameters, as set by the RIC.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
If there is a previous INSERT Indication Request to the RIC, then the corresponding Control Action ID used by the RIC for the ensuing CONTROL Request message is the one that matches the Insert Indication ID, among the ones provided in the table shown in Clause 7.6.4.1.
7.6.4.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contains identifier used by the Near-RT RIC to allow the RAN Function to match the outgoing INSERT Service message with a subsequent incoming CONTROL Service message.
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6.4.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE content
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a transparent container that is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message. However, this does not reflect the outcome of the call processing upon receiving the message.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.8.1).
7.6.5	CONTROL Service Style 4: Radio Access Control
7.6.5.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate or resume a radio access control related process using the RIC Control Message IE and associated RIC Control Header IE and the optional RIC Call Process ID IE used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT service. The corresponding INSERT service is service style 4 covered in Clause 7.5.5.
Applications of this service include:
-	RACH back-off
-	RRC connection reject
-	RRC connection release
-	Access barring
-	UE admission
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.5.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID, the Control Action ID IE and the RIC Control Decision IE that indicates whether the RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.5.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style, controlled by the near-RT RIC along with the values for these parameters, as set by the RIC.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
If there is a previous INSERT Indication Request to the RIC, then the corresponding Control Action ID used by the RIC for the ensuing CONTROL Request message is the one that matches the Insert Indication ID, among the ones provided in the table shown in Clause 7.6.5.1. However, the control action “RRC Connection Reject control” (corresponding to control action ID 5) can also be used to handle an incoming INSERT Indication Request corresponding to service style 4 that uses Indication request ID 1 (that corresponds to UE Admission Control Request).  It is also to be noted that the control action “UE admission control” (corresponding to control action ID 1) is used only as a response to an incoming INSERT indication with the corresponding service style and indication request ID and cannot be used asynchronously without a previous INSERT indication.
7.6.5.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contains identifier used by the Near-RT RIC to allow the RAN Function to match the outgoing INSERT Service message with a subsequent incoming CONTROL Service message.
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6.5.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a transparent container that is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message. However, this does not reflect the outcome of the call processing upon receiving the message.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.8.1).
7.6.6	CONTROL Service Style 5: Dual Connectivity Control
7.6.6.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate or resume a dual connectivity control related process using the RIC Control Message IE and associated RIC Control Header IE and the optional RIC Call Process ID IE used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT service.  The corresponding INSERT service is service style 5 covered in Clause 7.5.6.
Applications of this service include:
-	Dual connectivity (EN-DC, MR-DC or NR-NR DC) initiation for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell (PScell)
-	Secondary cell change for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell (PScell)
-	Dual connectivity (EN-DC, MR-DC or NR-NR DC) modification for a selected UE
-	Dual connectivity (EN-DC, MR-DC or NR-NR DC) release initiation for a selected UE
-	Change of bearer termination point (MN or SN) and/or bearer types for a selected UE
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.6.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID, the Control Action ID IE and the RIC Control Decision IE that indicates whether the RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.6.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style, controlled by the near-RT RIC along with the values for these parameters, as set by the RIC.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
If there is a previous INSERT Indication Request to the RIC, then the corresponding Control Action ID used by the RIC for the ensuing CONTROL Request message is the one that matches the Insert Indication ID, among the ones provided in the table shown in Clause 7.6.6.1.
7.6.6.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contains identifier used by the Near-RT RIC to allow the RAN Function to match the outgoing INSERT Service message with a subsequent incoming CONTROL Service message.
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6.6.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a transparent container that is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message. However, this does not reflect the outcome of the call processing upon receiving the message.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.8.1).
7.6.7	CONTROL Service Style 6: Carrier Aggregation Control
7.6.7.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate or resume a carrier aggregation control related process using the RIC Control Message IE and associated RIC Control Header IE and the optional RIC Call Process ID IE used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT service.  The corresponding INSERT service is service style 6 covered in Clause 7.5.7.
Applications of this service include:
-	Carrier Aggregation (CA) initiation for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell or cells
-	Secondary cell change for a selected UE towards a target secondary cell or cells
-	Carrier Aggregation (CA) modification for a selected UE
-	Carrier Aggregation (CA) release initiation for a selected UE
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.7.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID, the Control Action ID IE and the RIC Control Decision IE that indicates whether the RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.7.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style, controlled by the near-RT RIC along with the values for these parameters, as set by the RIC.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
If there is a previous INSERT Indication Request to the RIC, then the corresponding Control Action ID used by the RIC for the ensuing CONTROL Request message is the one that matches the Insert Indication ID, among the ones provided in the table shown in Clause 7.6.7.1.
7.6.7.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contains identifier used by the Near-RT RIC to allow the RAN Function to match the outgoing INSERT Service message with a subsequent incoming CONTROL Service message.
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6.7.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a transparent container that is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message. However, this does not reflect the outcome of the call processing upon receiving the message.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.8.1).
7.6.8	CONTROL Service Style 7: Idle Mode Mobility Control
7.6.8.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate or resume a idle mode mobility control related process using the RIC Control Message IE and associated RIC Control Header IE and the optional RIC Call Process ID IE used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT service. The corresponding INSERT service is service style 6 covered in Clause 7.5.7.
Applications of this service include:
-	Intra-frequency, inter-frequency, inter-RAT cell reselection priority
-	Idle timers
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.8.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID, the Control Action ID IE and the RIC Control Decision IE that indicates whether the RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.8.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style, controlled by the near-RT RIC along with the values for these parameters, as set by the RIC.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1)
If there is a previous INSERT Indication Request to the RIC, then the corresponding Control Action ID used by the RIC for the ensuing CONTROL Request message is the one that matches the Insert Indication ID, among the ones provided in the table shown in Clause 7.6.8.1.
7.6.8.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contains identifier used by the Near-RT RIC to allow the RAN Function to match the outgoing INSERT Service message with a subsequent incoming CONTROL Service message.
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
7.6.8.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a transparent container that is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message. However, this does not reflect the outcome of the call processing upon receiving the message.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.8.1).
7.6.9	CONTROL Service Style 8: UE information and assignment
7.6.9.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to both directly and indirectly monitor and control UE information and to add or remove explicit UE assignments to Explicit UE lists.
Applications of this service include:
-	UE to Explicit UE list assignment command: Used to Add or Remove the nominated UE to the Explicit UE list name, also used to request list of supported Explicit UE list
-	UE information request: Used to obtain UE information including list of Explicit UE List assignments
-	UE identification request: Used to complete UE identification
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows.
7.6.9.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contains the UE ID IE, RIC Style Type IE and Control Action ID IE. There is no previous INSERT Indication request from the E2 node for this service style.
Note that for RIC Action ID =1 "UE to Explicit UE list assignment command", the UE ID IE in the RIC Control Header IE shall be ignored when Assignment command=3 “Send list of supported Explicit UE list” (see clause 8.4.9.1).
Note that for RIC Action ID =3 "UE identification request", the UE ID IE in the RIC Control Header IE shall contain information elements set to zero (for INTEGER values), all bits = 0 (for OCTET STRING) or NULL (for PRINTABLE STRING values) if information is not known.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.9.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains a list of RAN Parameters used to support the information list of Control actions shown in Clause 7.6.9.1.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
7.6.9.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE is not supported for this CONTROL service style.
7.6.9.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contains a list of RAN Parameters and is used to carry information concerning the outcome of executing the RIC Control Request.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 3 IE (9.2.1.8.3).
7.6.10	CONTROL Service Style 255: Multiple Actions Control
7.6.10.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to initiate multiple control actions of the selected fundamental level CONTROL Service style(s) that should be processed in an integrated manner by the E2 Node, i.e. the RIC Control procedure is considered failed if at least one of the indicated control actions is unsuccessfully executed, and RIC CONTROL FAILURE message shall be sent containing the RIC Control Outcome for failed Control Action.
7.6.10.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 2 IE (9.2.1.6.2).
The RIC Indication Header IE may contain the UE ID IE to indicate to the E2 Node that this control request is only for that specific UE. The RIC Control Decision IE may also be included to indicate to the E2 Node whether the Near-RT RIC accepts or rejects the INDICATION request from the previous incoming INSERT indication, if any (with matching RAN Call Process ID IE), from the E2 node.
7.6.10.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 2 IE (9.2.1.7.2).
The RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters under a fundamental level Control Service style contained in the RIC Control Message IE follows the definitions of the indicated Control Service style.
If this control request is sent as a response to a previous INSERT indication from the E2 node, then the Control Action ID IE in the RIC Control Message IE is set in accordance with the triggered Insert Indication ID.
7.6.10.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service style uses E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1 IE (9.2.1.5.1).
The optional RIC Call Process ID IE is used when resuming a call process following a previous INSERT indication from the E2 Node.
7.6.10.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 2 IE (9.2.1.8.2).
For each control action indicated by the Control Action ID IE, the associated RAN parameters are used to carry the corresponding processing outcome.
7.6.11	CONTROL Service Style 9: Measurement Reporting Configuration Control
7.6.11.1		CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to add, modify or delete measurement report configuration for the UE to the network using the RIC Control Message IE and the RIC Control Header IE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Add configuration of measurement objects, reporting objects, measurement gaps, etc. for UE reporting, pertaining to a given UE or a group of UEs
-	Modify configuration of measurement objects, reporting objects, measurement gaps, etc. for UE reporting, pertaining to a given UE or a group of UEs
-	Delete configuration of measurement objects, reporting objects, measurement gaps, etc. for UE reporting, pertaining to a given UE or a group of UEs
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows:
7.6.11.2		CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
The CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID IE, the Control Action ID IE. The RIC Control Decision IE for this service style is currently not supported for this control service style.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
For UE group-based CONTROL action, this CONTROL style uses the E2SM-RC Control Header Format 3 IE (9.2.1.6.3), where the RIC Control Header IE has the UE Group ID IE for identifying the UE group, the UE Group Definition IE for defining the UE group in terms of one or more associated RAN parameters, along with the RIC Style Type IE and the Control Action ID IE.
7.6.11.3		CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
For UE group-based CONTROL action, this CONTROL style uses the E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3 IE (9.2.1.7.3). The RIC Control Message IE may optionally include the list of filter definitions for identifying the relevant RAN entities of the UE group, given by the Entity Filter Definition IE in the List of entity filters IE, along with the identifier of the entity filter given by the Entity Filter ID IE, for which the control action is applicable. The sequence of RAN parameters controlled by the Near-RT RIC for the entities of the UEs in the group, corresponding to each entity filter, is given by the List of RAN control parameters for the matching entities IE.
If the UE Group Definition IE and the List of entity filters IE do not point to one or more cells, then the control action is applied to the relevant groups of UEs, as identified by the UE Group Definition IE, across all cells within the E2 node.
7.6.11.4		CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE is currently not supported for this CONTROL service style.
7.6.11.5		CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE is used to carry the outcome of processing the incoming RIC Control Request message.  The corresponding RAN parameters supported for RIC Control Outcome IE are given in Clause 8.4.10.4.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 3 IE (9.2.1.8.3).
If the control action is a UE group-based control action, then the CONTROL style uses the E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1 IE and includes the RAN parameters shown in table 7.6.11.5-1 in the RIC Control Outcome IE.
7.6.12	CONTROL Service Style 10: Beamforming Configuration Control
7.6.12.1	CONTROL Service Style description
This CONTROL Service style provides a mechanism to add, modify or delete beamforming configuration for a UE using the RIC Control Message IE and the RIC Control Header IE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Configure, reconfigure, or release Non-GoB beamforming mode [32] for a UE
The supported RAN control actions and the corresponding RAN parameters are as follows:
7.6.12.2	CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE contents
The CONTROL Service RIC Control Header IE has the UE ID IE, the Control Service Style ID IE, the Control Action ID IE. The RIC Control Decision IE for this service style is currently not supported for this control service style.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.6.1).
7.6.12.3	CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Message IE contains the sequence of RAN parameters, associated with a given Control Action within this Control Service style.
The corresponding RAN parameters supported for RIC Control Message IE are given in Clause 8.4.11.
This CONTROL style uses E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1 IE (9.2.1.7.1).
7.6.12.4	CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Call Process ID IE is currently not supported for this CONTROL service style.
7.6.12.5	CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE contents
This CONTROL Service RIC Control Outcome IE is currently not supported for this CONTROL service style.
7.7	Supported RIC POLICY Services
7.7.1	POLICY Service style list
Each of the POLICY Service Styles 1-8 listed above are supported using the following common features:
•	Event Trigger: POLICY service is initiated by either Event Trigger style 1: Message Event or Event Trigger style 2: Call process breakpoint.
•	Action ID: The index ID for the individual action under a given POLICY Service style.
•	Action Name: Indicates the functionality of the E2 node which is controlled by Near-RT RIC
•	Action Description: Describes the action and functionality of the receiving E2 Node.
•	Associated RAN parameters: Identifies the RAN parameters to be controlled by Near-RT RIC pertaining to the given Policy action, used to define Policy Condition and RAN Imperative Policy.
All POLICY Service styles use E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) which provides the policy conditions and corresponding Policy Action. All of these factors are defined as a sequence of RAN Parameters assigned according to a given Policy Style and Policy Action where:
-	Policy Action ID is a Policy specific identifier of a specific Action for a specific Policy style.
-	Policy Condition is a Policy specific condition to select a specific Policy Action. Policy Condition is described in terms of a list of test conditions concerning UE and E2 Node information selection criteria using RAN Parameters defined with a Conditional Criteria Definition. Default RAN behavior is to be applied to any UE when none of the Policy conditions are met.
-	Policy Action is encoded in terms of a list of specific RAN Parameters and shall be applied to any UE that meets a specific Policy Condition. Policy Action may contain optional Policy Decision to indicate acceptance or rejection of a RRM function when the Policy Conditions are met.
The details of the individual POLICY Service Styles and specific Policy Actions are provided in subsequent sections.
7.7.2	POLICY Service Style 1: Radio Bearer Control
7.7.2.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an Imperative Policy to control execution of a radio bearer control related process.
Applications of this service include:
-	DRB QoS Modification, to tune DRB level QoS related parameters to meet the QoS optimization targets.
-	QoS Flow mapping, to adjust the mapping relationship between QoS flows and DRBs.
-	Logical channel configuration
-	Radio Bearer Admission, to guide DRB admission control algorithms for admission and/or rejection of DRB requests
-	DRB termination
-	DRB Split bearer
-	PDCP duplication control
7.7.2.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.3	POLICY Service Style 2: Radio Resource Allocation Control
7.7.3.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an Imperative Policy to control execution of a radio resource allocation control related process.
Applications of this service include:
-	Discontinuous Reception (DRX) control
-	Scheduling request (SR) control
-	Semi-Persistent Scheduling (SPS) control
-	Configured grant
-	Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) table
-	Slice level PRB quota
7.7.3.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.4	POLICY Service Style 3: Connected Mode Mobility Control
7.7.4.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an Imperative Policy to control execution of a connected mode mobility control related process.
Applications of this service, for both serving and target RAN nodes, include:
-	Handover (HO) or Conditional handover (CHO) mode selection
-	Measurement configuration for handover candidate cell detection (intra-frequency, inter-frequency, inter-RAT)
-	Handover decision and target cell selection
-	Dual Active Protocol Stack (DAPS) usage
7.7.4.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.5	POLICY Service Style 4: Radio Access Control
7.7.5.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an Imperative Policy to control execution of a radio access control related process.
Applications of this service include:
-	RACH back-off
-	RRC connection admission
-	RRC connection release
-	Access barring
-	UE Admission
7.7.5.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.6	POLICY Service Style 5: Dual Connectivity (DC) Control
7.7.6.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an Imperative Policy to control execution of a dual connectivity control related process.
Applications of this service, for both Master and Secondary nodes, include:
-	DC (EN-DC, MR-DC or NR-NR DC) mode selection
-	Measurement configuration for candidate secondary cell detection
-	DC initiation decision (M-NG-RAN or MeNB role)
-	DC change decision (M-NG-RAN or MeNB role)
-	DC addition request acceptance (S-NG-RAN or SgNB role)
-	Target secondary cell selection
-	DC release decision
-	Change of bearer termination point (MN or SN) and/or bearer types
7.7.6.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.7	POLICY Service Style 6: Carrier Aggregation (CA) Control
7.7.7.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an Imperative Policy to control execution of a carrier aggregation control related process.
Applications of this service include:
-	Measurement configuration for candidate secondary cell detection
-	CA initiation decision
-	Target secondary cell selection
-	CA release decision
7.7.7.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.8	POLICY Service Style 7: Idle Mode Mobility Control
7.7.8.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an Imperative Policy to control execution of a idle mode mobility control related process.
Applications of this service include:
-	Cell re-selection criteria (intra-frequency, inter-frequency, inter-RAT)
-	Inactivity timer
7.7.8.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.9	POLICY Service Style 8: Measurement Reporting Configuration Control
7.7.9.1		POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an imperative policy to add, modify or delete measurement report configuration for the UE to the network.
Applications of this service include:
-	Policy to add configuration of measurement objects, reporting objects, measurement gaps, etc.
-	Policy to modify configuration of measurement objects, reporting objects, measurement gaps, etc.
-	Policy to delete configuration of measurement objects, reporting objects, measurement gaps, etc.
7.7.9.2		POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.7.10	POLICY Service Style 9: Beamforming Configuration Control
7.7.10.1	POLICY Service Style description
This POLICY Service style provides an imperative policy to add, modify or delete beamforming configuration for a UE.
Applications of this service include:
-	Policy to configure, reconfigure, or release Non-GoB beamforming mode [32] for a UE
7.7.10.2	POLICY Service RIC Action Definition IE contents
This POLICY Service style uses E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE (9.2.1.2.2) using the approach described in Clause 7.7.1.
The supported Policy Actions for this Policy style are as follows:
7.8	Supported RIC QUERY Services
7.8.1	QUERY Service style list
7.8.2	QUERY Service Style 1: E2 Node Information Query
7.8.2.1	QUERY Service Style description
This QUERY Service style is used to request any data related to E2 Node by Near-RT RIC. E2 Node shall use this service style to respond to the requested information from Near-RT RIC. The data related to the following information, can be requested and responded using this service.
-	Cell Configuration related information
-	Neighbor Relation related information
7.8.2.2	QUERY Service RIC Query Header IE contents
This QUERY Service style uses the E2SM-RC Query Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.9.1).
7.8.2.3	QUERY Service RIC Query Definition IE contents
The RIC Query Definition for this service style indicates the information type requested by Near-RT RIC.
The QUERY Service style uses the E2SM-RC Query Definition Format 1 IE (9.2.1.10.1). The supported Parameters for this format are provided in Clause 8.6.1.
7.8.2.4	QUERY Service RIC Query Outcome IE contents
This QUERY Service style uses the E2SM-RC Query Outcome Format 1 IE (9.2.1.11.1). The mapping of RAN parameters configured in the RIC Query Definition IE to the reported IEs in the E2SM-RC Query Outcome Format 1 IE is provided in the semantics description of the IEs.
7.8.3	QUERY Service Style 2: UE Information Query
7.8.3.1	QUERY Service Style description
This QUERY Service style is used to request any data related to UE Information by Near-RT RIC. E2 Node shall use this service style to respond to the requested information from Near-RT RIC. The data related to the following information, but not limited to, can be requested and responded using this service.
-	UE Context related information
The reporting may be per UE based depending on the information requested.
7.8.3.2	QUERY Service RIC Query Header IE contents
This QUERY Service style uses the E2SM-RC Query Header Format 1 IE (9.2.1.9.1).
7.8.3.3	QUERY Service RIC Query Definition IE contents
The RIC Query Definition for this service style indicates the information type requested by Near-RT RIC.
The QUERY Service style uses the E2SM-RC Query Definition Format 1 IE (9.2.1.10.1). The supported Parameters for this format are provided in Clause 8.6.2.
7.8.3.4	QUERY Service RIC Query Outcome IE contents
This QUERY Service style uses the E2SM-RC Query Outcome Format 2 IE (9.2.1.11.2). The mapping of RAN parameters configured in the RIC Query Definition IE to the reported IEs in the E2SM-RC Query Outcome Format 2 IE is provided in the semantics description of the IEs.
7.9	Supported RIC Service Styles and E2SM IE Formats
Table 7.9-1, Table 7.9-2 and Table 7.9.3 provide a summary of the E2SM IE Formats defined to support this E2SM specification.
Table 7.9-1: Summary of the E2SM IE Formats defined to support RIC Event Trigger Styles
Table 7.9-2: Summary of the E2SM IE Formats defined to support RIC Service Styles
Table 7.9-3: Summary of the E2SM IE Formats defined to support RIC Service Styles
8	RAN Parameter assignments
8.0	Approach
The RAN parameters associated with each RIC service described in Clause 7 are listed here in Clause 8.  Each RAN parameter belongs to one of the following value types:
ELEMENT: a singleton variable, which does not have any other associated RAN parameters.
STRUCTURE: a sequence of RAN parameters, each of which can be either an ELEMENT or a STRUCTURE or a LIST
LIST: a list of STRUCTURES, where each STRUCTURE is as defined above. The sequence of RAN parameters is the same across all the STRUCTURES within the list.
The corresponding 3GPP standard definitions of these RAN parameters (if available) are referenced in the tables below under the “RAN Parameter Definition” column. These RAN parameters having 3GPP standard definitions are not freshly defined or redefined here.
Note that only those RAN parameters identified as ELEMENT are subject to test conditions by the RIC in the “Event Trigger Definition”.
Any RAN parameter within a STRUCTURE or LIST shall not be referenced individually. Hierarchy of a LIST or a STRUCTURE shall be traversed to access any RAN parameter within the LIST or STRUCTURE
Note that a RAN parameter may be associated with as a key where its corresponding Key Flag is set to “TRUE”. These RAN parameters serve as a reference to other RAN parameters within a structure that may be a part of LIST to enable the E2 Node interpret the scope of RAN parameters that are controlled by Near-RT RIC.
If the “key flag” is specified in the RIC Event Trigger Definition IE, then the RAN parameters corresponding to “that specific itemized structure” in the list indexed by the “key flag” are subject to test condition, but if the “key flag” is not mentioned in the RIC Event Trigger Definition IE, then the RAN parameters corresponding to “any itemized structure” within the list are subject to test condition.
For e.g., The ‘QFI’ can be considered a ‘key parameter’ to identify a QoS flow among the list of flows in a UE-specific PDU session. If the QFI parameter is NOT mentioned and the RIC subscribes to an event pertaining to 5QI 8, then “any QoS flow” in the list of flows of a PDU session for the UE that matches the condition of 5QI being equal to 8 would be covered by this event trigger definition. On the other hand, if the QFI parameter is mentioned in the RIC Event Trigger Definition IE, then only that specific QoS flow pertaining to the indicated QFI within the list is covered.
8.1	RAN parameters for Event Trigger
The RAN Parameters pertaining to “Event Trigger” that are used across multiple service styles are listed here. All RAN Parameters defined in clause 8.1 may also be used to define Policy Condition, see also clause 8.5.
8.1.1	Common RAN Parameters
This section contains the common set of RAN parameters that can be accessed via RAN parameters defined in each service style across multiple services.
8.1.1.1	NR Cell
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the NR cell.
8.1.1.2	E-UTRA Cell
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the E-UTRA cell.
8.1.1.3	RRC Signal Measurements
The following RAN Parameters are associated with RRC measurements.
8.1.1.4	L2 MAC State Variables
The following RAN Parameters are associated with UE-specific L2 MAC state variables.
8.1.1.5	NG-RAN Data Radio Bearer
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the NG-RAN data radio bearer.
8.1.1.6	QoS flow
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the NG-RAN QoS flow.
8.1.1.7	Cell Group
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the NR cell group item.
8.1.1.8	L2 Bearer State Variables
The following RAN Parameters are associated with UE-specific L2 bearer state variables across PDCP, RLC layers.
8.1.1.9	E-RAB QoS Parameters
The following RAN Parameters are associated with E-RAB QoS.
8.1.1.10	Connectivity and Mobility Event thresholds
The following RAN Parameters are associated with connectivity and mobility event thresholds, mainly related to A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6 events and inter-RAT B1 and B2 events.
8.1.1.11	E2 Node
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the E2 node.
8.1.1.12	gNB CU-CP Measurements
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the gNB CU-CP measurements.
8.1.1.13	gNB CU-UP Measurements
The following RAN Parameters are associated with gNB CU-UP measurements.
8.1.1.14	gNB DU Measurements
The following RAN Parameters are associated with gNB DU measurements.
8.1.1.15	gNB Measurements
The following RAN Parameters are associated with the gNB measurements.
8.1.1.16	PDU Session
The following RAN Parameters are associated with PDU session.
8.1.1.17	UE Context Information
8.1.1.18	eNB Measurements
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.1.2	RAN Parameters for Call Process Breakpoint
8.1.2.0	Call process type IDs
The RAN Parameters for the Event Trigger style 2 are defined based on the following call process type.
8.1.2.1	UE Context Management
The RAN Parameters for the call process type of “UE Context Management” are defined as follows.
8.1.2.1.1	UE Context Setup
8.1.2.1.2	UE Context Modification
8.1.2.1.3	UE Context Release
8.1.2.2	Bearer Context Management
The RAN Parameters for the call process type of “Bearer Context Management” are defined as follows.
8.1.2.2.1	Bearer Context Setup
8.1.2.2.2	Bearer Context Modification
8.1.2.2.3	Bearer Context Release
8.1.2.3	Mobility Management
The RAN Parameters for the call process type of “Mobility Management” are defined as follows.
8.1.2.3.1	Handover Preparation
8.1.2.3.2	Handover Cancel
8.1.2.3.3	Handover Resource Allocation
8.1.2.4	Multi-RAT Dual Connectivity Management
The RAN Parameters for the call process type of “Multi-RAT Dual Connectivity Management” are defined as follows.
8.1.2.4.1	SN Addition
8.1.2.4.2	SN Modification and deletion
8.1.2.5	Radio Resource Control Management
The RAN Parameters for the call process type of “Radio Resource Control Management” are defined as follows.
8.1.2.5.1	RRC CG-Config Information Transfer
8.1.2.5.2	RRC Cell Group Config Transfer
8.1.2.5.3	RRC Measurement Configuration
This Call Process Breakpoint uses RRC related RAN parameters defined in clauses 8.1.1 and 8.4.10.
8.1.2.6	PDU Session Management
The RAN Parameters for the call process type of “PDU Session Management” are defined as follows.
8.1.2.6.1	PDU Session Resource Setup
8.1.2.6.2	PDU Session Resource Modification
8.1.2.6.3	PDU Session Resource Release
8.1.3	RAN Parameters for UE Identification
The following RAN Parameters are defined for identification of UEs.
8.1.4	RAN Parameters for Cell Identification
The following RAN Parameters are defined for identification of Cells.
8.1.5	UE Events
The following UE Event IDs are defined.
8.2	RAN parameters for REPORT services
8.2.1	RAN Parameters for Report Service Style 1
In addition, this report style may use RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1.1.
8.2.2	RAN Parameters for Report Service Style 2
8.2.3	RAN Parameters for Report Service Style 3
8.2.4	RAN Parameters for Report Service Style 4
8.3	RAN parameters for INSERT services
8.3.1	Approach
The approach for RAN parameters associated with Insert service is provided in Clause 8.0.
8.3.2	Radio Bearer Control request
8.3.2.1	DRB QoS Configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.2.1.
8.3.2.2	QoS flow mapping configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.2.2.
8.3.2.3	Logical channel configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.2.3.
8.3.2.4	Radio Bearer Admission Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.2.4.
8.3.2.5	DRB Termination Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.2.5.
8.3.2.6	DRB Split Ratio Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.2.6.
8.3.2.7	PDCP Duplication Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.2.7.
8.3.3	Radio Resource Allocation request
8.3.3.1	DRX Parameter Configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.3.1.
8.3.3.2	Scheduling Request Parameter Configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.3.2.
8.3.3.3	Semi-Persistent Scheduling Parameter Configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.3.3.
8.3.3.4	Configured Grant Configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.3.4.
8.3.3.5	CQI table configuration request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.3.5.
8.3.3.6	Slice-level PRB quota allocation request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.3.6.
8.3.4	Connected Mode Mobility Control Request
8.3.4.1	Handover Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.4.1.
8.3.4.2	Conditional Handover Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.4.2.
8.3.4.3	DAPS Handover Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.4.3.
8.3.5	Radio Access Control request
8.3.5.1	UE admission control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.5.1.
8.3.5.2	RACH backoff control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.5.2.
8.3.5.3	Access barring control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.5.3.
8.3.5.4	RRC Connection Release request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.5.4.
8.3.5.5	RRC Connection Reject request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.5.5.
8.3.6	Dual Connectivity Control request
8.3.6.1	DC Secondary Node Addition Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.6.1.
8.3.6.2	DC Secondary Node Modification Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.6.2.
8.3.6.3	PSCell Change cell for Secondary Cell Group Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.6.3.
8.3.6.4	DC Secondary Node Change Control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.6.4.
8.3.7	Carrier Aggregation Control request
8.3.7.1	Secondary cell Addition control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.7.1.
8.3.7.2	Secondary cell Modification control request
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.7.2.
8.3.8	Idle Mode Mobility Control request
8.3.8.1	Cell reselection priority control
The RAN parameters associated with this Insert Indication are listed in Clause 8.4.8.1.
8.3.9	Common RAN Parameters for INSERT Service styles
The table below shows the set of RAN parameters that are common for all INSERT service styles.
8.3.9.1	UE Context Information
The associated RAN parameters are given in Clause 8.1.1.17.
8.3.9.2	E2 Node Context Information
The associated RAN parameters are given in Clause 8.1.1.11.
8.3.10	Indication Semantics Description for interpretation by the RIC
The E2 node requests the near-RT RIC for the following services as far as the radio bearer Control request is concerned.
(a)	In the RIC Indication Header IE, the E2 node indicates the Insert Indication ID, that is associated with the Insert Service Style ID for the radio bearer control request, along with the UE ID, so as to enable the RIC to interpret which Insert Indication service pertaining to which UE is being requested by the E2 node.
(b)	In the RIC Indication Message IE, the E2 node indicates the list of the RAN parameters in the Indication message that it wants to be controlled by the near-RT RIC. If the E2 node does not provide values for these parameters in the RIC Indication message IE, then the RIC would set the values for these parameters in the control action sent via the RIC Control Request message, along with its decision to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node (indicated in the RIC Indication Header IE). If the RAN parameter indicated by the E2 node is an ELEMENT, the RIC would set the value for the parameter in its RIC Control Request message. If the indicated RAN parameter is a STRUCTURE but if the E2 node does not list any constituent RAN parameter of the STRUCTURE, then the RIC would set the values for all the constituent RAN parameters of the STRUCTURE. If the parameter is a LIST, then:
a.	If the E2 node also indicates the Key RAN parameter pertaining to the itemized STRUCTURE in the LIST, then the RIC would set the values for all constituent RAN parameters within the structure, pointed by the key.
b.	If the E2 node does not indicate the Key RAN parameter pertaining to the itemized STRUCTURE in the LIST, then the RIC would set the values for all constituent RAN parameters within each itemized STRUCTURE, whose key RAN parameter is identified by the RIC.
(c)	If the E2 node provides values for these parameters in the RIC Indication message IE, then the RIC would set the values only for those indicated parameters for which it would choose to replace the values already set by the E2 node. It also communicates its decision to accept/deny the request raised by the E2 node for the DRB.
(d)	Any RAN parameter identified as a key shall always carry a value set by the E2 node, if the E2 node expects the RIC to control the parameters pertaining to the STRUCTURE pointed by the E2 node. The value of this key RAN parameter is an index that points to the entire STRUCTURE, and hence the value of the key RAN parameter cannot be modified by the near-RT RIC. Without indicating the value for the key RAN parameter, the RIC would not control the parameters associated with the structure indexed by the key.
Note that the RIC can only set the values for those RAN parameters identified as ELEMENT when they are indicated by the E2 node; however, these RAN parameters can be contained with a STRUCTURE or within an itemized STRUCTURE in a LIST. Also, if the DRB ID key parameter is not present for any DRB in the RIC Indication Message IE, then the RIC would discard the RIC Indication message. And the E2 node would have to set values based on its default radio resource management policies upon time out, and continue with the ongoing call processing. Hence, indicating the DRB ID IE for the DRB(s) is a pre-requisite for the RIC to act on the Insert indication via its RIC Control Request message.
8.4	RAN Parameters for Control Actions
8.4.1	Approach
The approach for RAN parameters associated with Control service is provided in Clause 8.0.
In the case of CONTROL action for UE group-based control (using E2SM-RC Control Header Format 3 and E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3), since the control action can be applied as a whole on multiple UEs constituting the group, the RAN parameters, whose key flag value is set to “true”, shall not be used here, since they are only used for UE-specific entities. Instead, as provided in E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3, the Entity Filter Definition IE (from E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3 in Clause 9.2.1.7.3) is used to define the entity filter and specify the corresponding set of filtering conditions towards determining the relevant entities (such as DRBs, QoS flows, etc.) pertaining to the UE group for which the control action is applicable. Each entity filter is identified by the Entity Filter ID IE. There may be more than one entity for the same UE group, whose associated RAN parameters can be controlled by the RIC using a single RIC CONTROL REQUEST message with the same Control Action ID IE. The control parameters, specific to a given set of entities, corresponding to the Entity Filter ID IE, are assigned values by the RIC. The list of all entity filters for the UE group are mentioned in List of entity filters IE. The control parameters are identified by the List of RAN control Parameters for the matching entities IE in E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3 (in Clause 9.2.1.7.3) and correspond to each Entity Filter ID IE. The control action is then applied (based on the approach in Clause 8.0) individually on all the applicable entities (e.g., all the applicable DRBs) pertaining to the UE group, subject to the filtering criteria.
For e.g., if PDCP duplication needs to be activated on all DRBs corresponding to 5QI 82 for the URLLC slice (SST 2) and if the number of duplicate PDCP paths needs to be set to 3, then the Entity Filter Definition IE in E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3 (Sec 9.2.1.7.3) can be used to specify conditions that can match all DRBs pertaining to the 5QI of 82, and the List of RAN control parameters for the matching entities IE can be used to indicate the PDCP duplication configuration parameters, which shall later be applied by the E2 node individually on all the applicable DRBs across the corresponding UEs of the URLLC slice that constitute the UE group.
The UE group control action may also be entity-agnostic. That is, the control action may not pertain to specific entities of the UEs, but may apply to the UEs as a whole. The List of entity filters IE is therefore optional.
As an example, if A3 offset needs to be set to 4 dB for all UEs with NR-CGI “xyz” as their primary SpCell, the control action in this case is entity-agnostic, as the control action shall be applied on all UEs with NR-CG “xyz” as their SpCell, irrespective of their entities.
Thus, if the control action is entity agnostic, then the List of entity filters IE is not present and the List of RAN control parameters IE is used to indicate the control parameters for the control action applied on the UE group.
In the E2SM-RC Control Header Format 3 IE shown in Clause 9.2.1.6.3, the UE Group ID IE and the UE Group Definition IE are used to uniquely identify and define the logical grouping of the UEs based on the list of RAN parameters from Clause 8.1.3, respectively. The RIC Style Type IE is used to refer to the RIC Control Service Style type and the Control Action ID IE is used to refer to a given control action within the RIC Control Service Style type.
8.4.2	Radio Bearer Control
8.4.2.1	DRB QoS Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to DRB QoS Configuration, such as Bearer Context Management, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the DRB ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
In the case of UE group-based control action, where the relevant entities include more than one DRB subject to QoS configuration, the above procedures are individually invoked for each applicable DRB pertaining to each individual UE of the group.
8.4.2.2	QoS flow mapping configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to QoS flow mapping Configuration, such as Bearer Context Management, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the DRB ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.2.3	Logical channel configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Logical channel Configuration, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related RRC messages. If the DRB ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
In the case of UE group-based control action, where the relevant entities include more than one DRB subject to LCID configuration, the above procedures are individually invoked for each applicable DRB pertaining to each individual UE of the group.
8.4.2.4	Radio Bearer Admission Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Radio Bearer Admission Control, such as Bearer Context Management, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the DRB ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.2.5	DRB Termination Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to DRB Termination change, such as Dual Connectivity Secondary Node Modification (MN/SN initiated), UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the DRB ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.2.6	DRB Split Ratio Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, in the presence of Downlink PDCP Data Split IE, the E2 node shall split the downlink PDCP traffic between the Master Node and Secondary Node over the X2/Xn interface based on the recommended ratio. In the presence of Uplink PDCP Data Split Threshold IE, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to DRB Split Ratio Control, such as Bearer Context Management, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the DRB ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.2.7	PDCP Duplication Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to PDCP Duplication Control, such as Bearer Context Management, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the DRB ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
In the case of UE group-based control action, where the relevant entities include more than one DRB subject to the PDCP duplication control action, the above procedures are individually invoked for each applicable DRB pertaining to each individual UE of the group.
8.4.3	Radio Resource Allocation Control
8.4.3.1	DRX Parameter Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to DRX Parameter Configuration, such as UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.3.2	Scheduling Request Parameter Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Scheduling Request Parameter Configuration, such as UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the Scheduling Request ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.3.3	Semi-Persistent Scheduling Parameter Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Scheduling Request Parameter Configuration, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.3.4	Configured Grant Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Scheduling Request Parameter Configuration, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.3.5	CQI table configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Scheduling Request Parameter Configuration, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the CSI Report Config ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.3.6	Slice-level PRB quota
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node allocates slice-specific PRB quota for the indicated S-NSSAI in terms of the maximum PRB allocation ratio, minimum PRB allocation ratio and dedicated PRB allocation ratio for the given slice among the available set of PRBs. If the S-NSSAI is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.4	Connected Mode Mobility Control
8.4.4.1	Handover Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, in the case of Xn/X2 or NG or inter-RAT handovers, the E2 node shall invoke procedures, such as Handover Preparation related to UE Mobility Management, Bearer Context Modification, UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. In the case of intra-gNB or F1 handover, the E2 node shall invoke procedures, such as UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. The E2 node includes the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the Target Primary Cell ID IE is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure message.
8.4.4.2	Conditional Handover Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, in the case of Xn/X2 or NG or inter-RAT conditional handovers, the E2 node shall invoke procedures, such as Handover Preparation related to UE Mobility Management, Bearer Context Modification, UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. involving the candidate target cells (note that there is only one Handover Preparation in the case of NG or inter-RAT handovers). In the case of intra-gNB or F1 conditional handover, the E2 node shall invoke procedures, such as UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. The E2 node includes the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the Target Cell IE is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure message.
8.4.4.3	DAPS Handover Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, in the case of Xn/X2 DAPS handovers, the E2 node shall invoke procedures, such as Handover Preparation related to UE Mobility Management, Bearer Context Modification, UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. In the case of intra-gNB or F1 DAPS handover, the E2 node shall invoke procedures, such as UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. The E2 node includes the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the Target Primary Cell ID IE is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure message.
8.4.5	Radio Access Control
8.4.5.1	UE admission control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to UE admission control, such as PDU Session Management, Bearer Context Management, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.5.2	RACH backoff control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to RACH backoff control, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.5.3	Access barring control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Access barring control, such as UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.5.4	RRC Connection Release Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to RRC Connection Release control, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.5.5	RRC Connection Reject Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to RRC Connection Reject, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.6	Dual Connectivity Control
8.4.6.1	DC Secondary Node Addition Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to DC Secondary Node Addition Control, such as Dual Connectivity Secondary Node Addition, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages. If the Secondary Node ID is missing in the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node will send a RIC Control Failure.
8.4.6.2	DC Secondary Node Modification Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to DC Secondary Node Modification Control, such as Dual Connectivity Secondary Node Modification, UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.6.3	PSCell Change control for Secondary Cell Group
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, in the case of intra-SN PSCell change, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to PSCell Change Control, such as Dual Connectivity Secondary Node Modification, UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. In the case of inter-SN PSCell change, the E2 node shall invoke procedures such as Dual Connectivity Secondary Node Release (MN/SN-initiated) or SN Change (only SN-initiated), Bearer Context Modification, UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. The E2 node then includes the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.6.4	DC Secondary Node Change Control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures such as Dual Connectivity Secondary Node Release (MN/SN-initiated) or SN Change (only SN-initiated), Bearer Context Modification, UE Context Modification, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and includes the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.7	Carrier Aggregation Control
8.4.7.1	Secondary cell Addition control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Secondary cell Addition Control, such as UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.7.2	Secondary cell Modification control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to Secondary cell Modification Control, such as UE Context Management, RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.8	Idle Mode Mobility Control
8.4.8.1	Cell reselection priority control
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to cell reselection priority control, such as RRC Message Transfer, etc. and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface messages.
8.4.9	UE identification and assignment
8.4.9.1	UE to Explicit UE list assignment command
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to the assignment of a target UE to an Explicit UE List and modify the corresponding Explicit UE List according to the contents of the RIC Control Message based on the following RAN Parameters.
RIC Control Message IE contents:
Upon processing the procedures related to the assignment of a target UE to an Explicit UE List, the E2 Node shall use the optional RIC Control Outcome IE to report the call processing outcome to the Near-RT RIC as a response to the control action:
i) If the outcome is successful
For Assignment command = 1, 2 and 4. Not used
For Assignment command = 3, the following parameters are to be used:
ii) If the outcome is not successful
The following RAN Parameters are to be used for all assignment commands:
8.4.10		Measurement Reporting Configuration Control
8.4.10.1		Add MR Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message with the Measurement Report Configuration Control Service Style and the Add MR Configuration control action, the E2 node shall invoke relevant RRC procedures to configure Measurement Report to the UE.  E2 Node shall include the IEs corresponding to one or more of RAN parameters described below in the related RRC or NI interface messages.
In the case of UE group-based control action, the above RRC procedure(s) is invoked individually for each individual UE within the group.
8.4.10.2		Modify MR Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message with the Measurement Report Configuration Control Service Style and the Modify MR Configuration control action, the E2 node shall invoke RRC procedures related to MR Configuration, include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related NI interface messages or RRC message.
In the case of UE group-based control action, the above RRC procedure(s) is invoked individually for each individual UE within the group.
8.4.10.3		Delete MR Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message with the Measurement Report Configuration Control Service Style and the Modify MR Configuration control action, the E2 node shall invoke RRC procedures related to deletion of  MR Configuration and include the IEs corresponding to one or more of parameters described below in the related interface or RRC  messages.
In the case of UE group-based control action, the above RRC procedure(s) is invoked individually for each individual UE within the group.
8.4.10.4		Control Outcome parameters
In the case of a UE-specific control action, upon processing the above RRC procedure (RRCReconfiguration message) with the control action parameters sent by the RIC, the E2 node shall report the call processing outcome to the RIC as a response to the control action based on the following parameters.
8.4.11	Beamforming Configuration Control
8.4.11.1	Non-GoB BF Mode Configuration
Upon receiving the RIC Control Request message, the E2 node shall invoke procedures related to configuring the Non-GoB MIMO beamforming mode index of the UE given by the value of the Non-GoB Beamforming Mode Index IE, possibly based on the MIMO mode chosen for the UE by the scheduler by the MIMO Mode Index IE. The recommended value of the Non-GoB beamforming mode index for the UE by the Near-RT RIC, along with the corresponding MIMO mode index given by the MIMO Mode Index IE if configured, is saved by the E2 node. If and when the MAC scheduler configures the UE and in the MIMO mode indicated by the MIMO Mode Index IE if configured, then the scheduler shall use the Non-GoB Beamforming Mode Index IE recommended by the Near-RT RIC (that is saved in the E2 node).
8.5	RAN parameters for POLICY services
8.5.1	Approach
The RAN parameters associated with each policy action being controlled by Near-RT RIC described in Clause 7.7 are listed.
There are two types of E2 policies:
i)	Control action policy: In this type, the near-RT RIC tells the E2 node on the specific per-UE control action that needs to be performed, upon meeting a given policy condition for a given UE or a group of UEs, for a given cell and/or for a given E2 node. This policy type is descriptive in nature. The control action is defined with respect to individual UEs and UE-specific bearers, flows, PDU sessions, etc.
ii)	Offset based policy: In this type, the near-RT RIC offers a generic prescriptive guidance to the E2 node on how it shall deviate from default behavior via the application of offset parameters provided in the Policy Action IE. Different Policy Action IEs are associated with different POLICY conditions described in terms of UE and E2 Node characteristics. As defined in Clause 6.6.3, offset parameters are to be applied to default parameters according to the following rules:
-	INTEGER and REAL default parameters: Offset parameter have the same data type as default parameter and is added to default parameter with positive offset parameter values increasing default value and negative offset parameter values decreasing default value.  That is, policy modifies the target call process such that:
Value to be applied = (Default Parameter) + (Offset Parameter)
-	ENUMERATED parameters: Offset parameter are of data type INTEGER and are used to select a different item in the ENUMERATED list, positive offset parameter values used to select items that are further on in the list, zero offset parameter values used to select the default value, negative offset parameter values used to select items that are earlier on in the list.  When and if the offset parameter value results in the selection of an item in the ENUMERATED list that exceeds the ENUMERATED list length then the last item in the list is selected.  When and if the offset parameter value results in the selection of an item in the ENUMERATED list that prior to the first item in the ENUMERATED list then the first item in the list is selected.  That is, policy modifies the target call process such that:
ENUMERATED List index = MIN [List length-1, MAX [0, (Default Parameter) + (Offset Parameter)] ]
8.5.1A	Common RAN Parameters for POLICY services
The common set of RAN Parameters that can be used across all POLICY service styles is given in the table below.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters, POLICY conditions may also use RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1 for RIC Event Trigger Definition IE.
8.5.2	Radio Bearer Control
8.5.2.0	Common RAN Parameters for Radio Bearer Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Radio Bearer Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for POLICY conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.2.1	DRB QoS Configuration
8.5.2.1.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.2.1.
8.5.2.1.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.2.2	QoS flow mapping configuration
8.5.2.2.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.2.2.
8.5.2.2.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.2.3	Logical channel configuration
8.5.2.3.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.2.3.
8.5.2.3.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.2.4	Radio Bearer Admission Control
8.5.2.4.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.2.4.
8.5.2.4.2	Offset
8.5.2.5	DRB Termination Control
8.5.2.5.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.2.5.
8.5.2.5.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.2.6	DRB Split Ratio Control
8.5.2.6.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.2.6.
8.5.2.6.2	Offset
8.5.2.7	PDCP Duplication Control
8.5.2.7.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.2.7.
8.5.2.7.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.3	Radio Resource Allocation Control
8.5.3.0	Common RAN Parameters for Radio Resource Allocation Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Radio Resource Allocation Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for Policy conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.3.1	DRX Parameter Configuration
8.5.3.1.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.3.1.
8.5.3.1.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.3.2	Scheduling Request Parameter Configuration
8.5.3.2.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.3.2.
8.5.3.2.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.3.3	Semi-Persistent Scheduling Parameter Configuration
8.5.3.3.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.3.3.
8.5.3.3.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.3.4	Configured Grant Configuration
8.5.3.4.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.3.4.
8.5.3.4.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.3.5	CQI table configuration
8.5.3.5.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.3.5.
8.5.3.5.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.3.6	Slice-level PRB quota
8.5.3.6.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.3.6.
8.5.3.6.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.4	Connected Mode Mobility Control
8.5.4.0	Common RAN Parameters for Connected Mode Mobility Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Connected Mode Mobility Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for Policy conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.4.1	Handover Control
8.5.4.1.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.4.1.
8.5.4.1.2	Offset
8.5.4.2	Conditional Handover Control
8.5.4.2.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.4.2.
8.5.4.2.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.5.4.1.2.
8.5.4.3	DAPS Handover Control
8.5.4.3.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.4.3.
8.5.4.3.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.5.4.1.2.
8.5.5	Radio Access Control
8.5.5.0	Common RAN Parameters for Radio Access Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Radio Access Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for Policy conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.5.1	UE admission control request
8.5.5.1.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.5.1.
8.5.5.1.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.5.2	RACH backoff control request
8.5.5.2.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.5.2.
8.5.5.2.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.5.3	Access barring control request
8.5.5.3.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.5.3.
8.5.5.3.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.5.4	RRC Connection Release request
8.5.5.4.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.5.3.
8.5.5.4.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.5.5	RRC Connection Reject request
8.5.5.5.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.5.3.
8.5.5.5.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.6	Dual Connectivity Control
8.5.6.0	Common RAN Parameters for Dual Connectivity Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Dual Connectivity Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for Policy conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.6.1	DC Secondary Node Addition Control
8.5.6.1.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.6.1.
8.5.6.1.2	Offset
8.5.6.2	DC Secondary Node Modification Control
8.5.6.2.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.6.2.
8.5.6.2.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.5.4.1.2.
8.5.6.3	PSCell Change cell for Secondary Cell Group
8.5.6.3.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.6.3.
8.5.6.3.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.5.4.1.2.
8.5.6.4	DC Secondary Node Change Control
8.5.6.4.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.6.4.
8.5.6.4.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.5.4.1.2.
8.5.7	Carrier Aggregation Control
8.5.7.0	Common RAN Parameters for Carrier Aggregation Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Carrier Aggregation Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for Policy conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.7.1	Secondary cell Addition control
8.5.7.1.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.7.1.
8.5.7.1.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.5.4.1.2.
8.5.7.2	Secondary cell Modification control
8.5.7.2.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.7.2.
8.5.7.2.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.5.4.1.2.
8.5.8	Idle Mode Mobility Control
8.5.8.0	Common RAN Parameters for Idle Mode Mobility Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Idle Mode Mobility Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for POLICY conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.8.1	Cell reselection priority control
8.5.8.1.1	Control action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.8.1.
8.5.8.1.2	Offset
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.5.4. For the priority and sub priority parameters, values are used to set offsets with respect to the default behaviour, i.e., carrier frequency with fourth priority and an offset of +1 shall be considered as third priority
8.5.9		Measurement Reporting Configuration Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to Policy Conditions for the “Measurement Report Configuration Control” policy service style are given below.
In addition, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Thus, this service style currently supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1 and 8.5.1 in addition to those defined below.
8.5.9.1		Add MR Configuration
8.5.9.1.1	Control Action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.10.1.
8.5.9.1.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.9.2		Modify MR Configuration
8.5.9.2.1	Control Action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.10.2.
8.5.9.2.2	Offset
RAN parameters in clause 8.4.10.2, where appropriate, may be modified via “offsets”. The offsets are provided by Policy Actions. See clause 6.6.3 for the policy “offset” approach.
8.5.9.3		Delete MR Configuration
8.5.9.3.1	Control Action
The RAN parameters associated with this policy type are listed in the table in Clause 8.4.10.3.
8.5.9.3.2	Offset
Editor’s Note: FFS
8.5.10	Beamforming Configuration Control
8.5.10.0	Common RAN Parameters for Beamforming Configuration Control
The RAN Parameters pertaining to POLICY Conditions for the “Beamforming Configuration Control” policy service style used across all POLICY actions of the policy service style are listed in the below table.
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters for Policy conditions, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1. Accordingly, this service style supports Policy Conditions using the RAN parameters defined in Clauses 8.1, 8.5.1 and those covered in the above table.
8.5.10.1	Non-GoB BF Mode Configuration
8.5.10.1.1	Control Action
8.5.10.1.2	Offset
This policy type does not support the offset approach.
8.6	RAN parameters for QUERY services
8.6.1	RAN Parameters for Query Service Style 1
8.6.2	RAN Parameters for Query Service Style 2
In addition to using the above RAN Parameters, this service style also uses RAN parameters defined in Clause 8.1.1.
9	Elements for E2SM Service Model
9.1	General
9.2	Message Functional Definition and Content
9.2.1	Messages for RIC Functional procedures
9.2.1.1	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE
This information element is part of the RIC SUBSCRIPTION REQUEST message sent by the Near-RT RIC to an E2 Node and is required for event triggers used to initiate REPORT, INSERT and POLICY actions.
Direction: NEAR-RT RIC  E2 Node.
9.2.1.1.1		E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 1: Message Event
9.2.1.1.2		E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 2: Call Process Breakpoint
9.2.1.1.3		E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 3: E2 Node Information Change
9.2.1.1.4		E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 4: UE Information Change
9.2.1.1.5		VOID
9.2.1.2	RIC ACTION DEFINITION IE
This information element is part of the RIC SUBSCRIPTION REQUEST message sent by the Near-RT RIC to an E2 Node. In this service model, this information element provides additional information for the nominated RIC Action.
Direction: NEAR-RT RIC  E2 Node.
9.2.1.2.1	E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 1
The E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 1 IE supports a REPORT service and is encoded as a list of RAN parameters to be reported, each with a RAN Parameter ID and RAN Parameter Definition. RAN parameters for REPORT service are defined in Clause 8.2.
9.2.1.2.2	E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2
The E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE supports Policy services encoded as a list of Policy Conditions, each with a Policy Condition definition described using RAN Parameter Conditional Criteria Definition IE in terms of a list of RAN parameters with test conditions and a Policy Action IE command described in terms of a list of RAN parameters. The meaning of the RAN Parameter ID/Value pairs for each list is defined in Clause 8.5.
9.2.1.2.3	E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3
The E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 3 IE supports an INSERT service of the indicated RIC Style Type IE and is encoded by the Insert Indication ID and a list of RAN parameters. The meaning of the RAN Parameter ID(s) in the list is defined in Clause 8.3.
9.2.1.2.4	E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 4
The E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 4 IE supports multiple Insert Indication actions of one or more requested INSERT services, where each Insert Indication action is encoded by Insert Indication ID and a list of RAN parameters. The meaning of the RAN Parameter ID/Value pairs for each list is defined in Clause 8.3.
9.2.1.3	RIC INDICATION HEADER IE
This information element is part of the RIC INDICATION message sent by the E2 Node to the Near-RT RIC and is required for REPORT action.
Direction: E2 Node  NEAR-RT RIC.
9.2.1.3.1	E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 1
9.2.1.3.2	E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 2
9.2.1.3.3	E2SM-RC Indication Header Format 3
9.2.1.4	RIC INDICATION MESSAGE IE
This information element is part of the RIC INDICATION message sent by the E2 Node to the Near-RT RIC and is required for REPORT action.
Direction: E2 Node  NEAR-RT RIC.
9.2.1.4.1	E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 1
9.2.1.4.2	E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 2
9.2.1.4.3	E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 3
9.2.1.4.4	VOID
9.2.1.4.5	E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 5
9.2.1.4.6	E2SM-RC Indication Message Format 6
9.2.1.5	RIC CALL PROCESS ID IE
This information element is part of the RIC INDICATION message sent by the E2 Node to a Near-RT RIC node and is required for INSERT action. The same information element is used in RIC Control procedure
Direction: E2 Node  Near-RT RIC (when carried in RIC INDICATION) and Near-RT RIC  E2 Node (when carried in RIC CONTROL REQUEST).
9.2.1.5.1	E2SM-RC Call Process ID Format 1
9.2.1.6	RIC CONTROL HEADER IE
This information element is part of the RIC CONTROL message sent by the Near-RT RIC to an E2 Node and is required for RIC Control Procedure.
Direction: Near-RT RIC  E2 Node.
9.2.1.6.1	E2SM-RC Control Header Format 1
9.2.1.6.2	E2SM-RC Control Header Format 2
9.2.1.6.3	E2SM-RC Control Header Format 3
9.2.1.7	RIC CONTROL MESSAGE IE
This information element is part of the RIC CONTROL message sent by the Near-RT RIC to an E2 Node and is required for RIC Control Procedure.
Direction: Near-RT RIC  E2 Node.
9.2.1.7.1	E2SM-RC Control Message Format 1
9.2.1.7.2	E2SM-RC Control Message Format 2
9.2.1.7.3	E2SM-RC Control Message Format 3
.
9.2.1.8	RIC CONTROL OUTCOME IE
This information element is part of the RIC CONTROL ACKOWLEDGEMENT and RIC CONTROL FAILURE messages and is sent by the E2 Node to the Near-RT RIC and is required for RIC Control Procedure.
Direction: E2 Node  Near-RT RIC.
9.2.1.8.1	E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 1
The E2SM-RC Control Outcome IE Format 1 supports a sequence of RAN Parameters sent as ID/Value pairs. The meaning of the ID/Value pairs is defined in Clause 7.6.
9.2.1.8.2	E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 2
9.2.1.8.3	E2SM-RC Control Outcome Format 3
The E2SM-RC Control Outcome IE Format 3 supports a sequence of RAN Parameters sent as ID and RAN parameter value types, where each RAN parameter value type is based on the categorization of the parameters into ELEMENT with Key Value TRUE, ELEMENT with Key Value FALSE, STRUCTURE and LIST.
9.2.1.9	RIC QUERY HEADER IE
This information element is part of the RIC QUERY REQUEST message sent by the Near-RT RIC to an E2 Node and is required for RIC QUERY Procedure.
Direction: Near-RT RIC  E2 Node.
9.2.1.9.1	E2SM-RC Query Header Format 1
9.2.1.10	RIC QUERY DEFINITION IE
This information element is part of the RIC QUERY REQUEST message sent by the Near-RT RIC to an E2 Node and is required for RIC Query Procedure.
Direction: Near-RT RIC  E2 Node.
9.2.1.10.1	E2SM-RC Query Definition Format 1
9.2.1.11	RIC QUERY OUTCOME IE
This information element is part of the RIC QUERY RESPONSE message sent by the Near-RT RIC to an E2 Node and is required for RIC Query Procedure.
Direction: E2 Node  Near-RT RIC
9.2.1.11.1	E2SM-RC Query Outcome Format 1
9.2.1.11.2	E2SM-RC Query Outcome Format 2
9.2.2	Messages for RIC Global Procedures
9.2.2.1	RAN Function Definition IE
This information element is part of the E2 SETUP REQUEST, and RIC SERVICE UPDATE message sent by the E2 Node to the Near-RT RIC and is used to provide all required information for the Near-RT RIC to determine how a given E2 Node has been configured to support a given RAN Function specific E2SM.
Direction: E2 Node  NEAR-RT RIC.
9.2.2.2	RAN Function Definition for EVENT TRIGGER
9.2.2.3	RAN Function Definition for REPORT
9.2.2.4	RAN Function Definition for INSERT
9.2.2.5	RAN Function Definition for CONTROL
9.2.2.6	RAN Function Definition for POLICY
9.2.2.7	RAN Function Definition for QUERY
9.3	Information Element definitions
9.3.1	General
When specifying information elements which are to be represented by bit strings, if not otherwise specifically stated in the semantics description of the concerned IE or elsewhere, the following principle applies with regards to the ordering of bits:
-	The first bit (leftmost bit) contains the most significant bit (MSB);
-	The last bit (rightmost bit) contains the least significant bit (LSB);
-	When importing bit strings from other specifications, the first bit of the bit string contains the first bit of the concerned information.
9.3.2	RAN Function Name
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.1.
9.3.3	RIC Style Type
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.2.
9.3.4	RIC Style Name
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.3.
9.3.5	RIC Format Type
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.4.
9.3.6	Control Action ID
This IE uniquely identifies an action of a given RIC Control style.
9.3.7	Control Action Name
This IE defines the name of a given control action.
9.3.8	RAN Parameter ID
This IE uniquely identifies a specific RAN parameter of a given RIC Control style.
9.3.9	RAN Parameter Name
This IE defines the name of a given RAN parameter.
9.3.10	UE ID
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.6.
9.3.11	RAN Parameter Value Type
This IE specifies the RAN parameters controlled by the RIC. The parameters can be individual elements, or structures containing constituent elements or a list of structures. The parameters and their types are given in Clause 8.4.
9.3.12	RAN Parameter Structure
9.3.13	RAN Parameter List
9.3.14	RAN Parameter Value
This IE defines the target value type for a RAN parameter ELEMENT.
9.3.15	Call Process Type ID
This IE uniquely identifies a call Process Type for a call process breakpoint event trigger.
9.3.16	Insert Indication ID
This IE uniquely identifies an action of a given RIC Control style.
9.3.17	Insert Indication Name
This IE defines the name of a given control action.
9.3.18	RAN Call Process ID
9.3.19	Call Process Type Name
This IE defines the name of a given call Process Type.
9.3.20	Policy Action
This IE defines the Policy Action IE
9.3.21	Event Trigger Condition ID
This IE defines an identifier for event trigger conditions configured for a specific Event Trigger style.
9.3.22	Event Trigger ID for UE
This IE defines an identifier for a specific UE related condition configured for event triggering.
9.3.23	Event Trigger ID for UE Event
This IE defines an identifier for a specific UE event configured for event triggering.
9.3.24	Event Trigger ID for Cell
This IE defines an identifier for a specific cell related condition configured for event triggering.
9.3.25	Logical OR
This IE indicates a logical ("and” or “or”) connection of the current condition to the next condition in a given sequence of conditions.
9.3.26	Event Trigger UE Information
This IE defines a set of applicable UEs for event triggering.
9.3.27	Event Trigger Cell Information
This IE defines a set of applicable cells for event triggering.
9.3.28	Event Trigger UE Event Information
This IE defines a set of UE events for event triggering.
9.3.29	RAN Parameter Conditional Criteria Definition
This IE defines the generic test conditions based on RAN parameters.
9.3.30	RAN Parameter Test
This IE defines a set of test conditions for RAN parameters nested under a given RAN parameter through recursions. Only “ELEMENT” type of RAN parameter with Key Flag set to “False” is tested.
9.3.31	RAN Parameter Test Condition
This IE compares the particular value of a given RAN parameter with the target value.
For the choice type of “Comparison”, the test condition is Value (RAN Parameter ID) (RAN Parameter Test Condition) (RAN Parameter Value).
For the choice type of “Presence”, the test condition is applied to Value (RAN Parameter ID)
9.3.32	Network Interface Type
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.10.
9.3.33	Network Interface Identifier
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.11.
9.3.34	Network Interface Message ID
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.12.
9.3.35	RRC Message ID
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.13.
9.3.36	Cell Global ID
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.5.
9.3.37	RRC State
9.3.38	Neighbour Relation Information
9.3.39	Serving Cell PCI
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.14.
9.3.40	Serving Cell ARFCN
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.2.15.
9.3.41	NR CGI
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.7.
9.3.42	NR PCI
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.29.
9.3.43	NR TAC
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.31.
9.3.44	NR Frequency Info
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.36.
9.3.45	E-UTRA CGI
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.11.
9.3.46	E-UTRA PCI
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.32.
9.3.47	E-UTRA TAC
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.34.
9.3.48	E-UTRA ARFCN
This IE is defined in [4] clause 6.2.3.33.
9.3.49	Call Process Breakpoint ID
This IE uniquely identifies a call Process breakpoint for a given call process type.
9.3.50	Call Process Breakpoint Name
This IE defines the name of a given call Process breakpoint.
9.3.51	RAN Parameter Definition
This IE specifies the definition of a RAN parameter that can be controlled by the RIC when the RAN parameter is of a STRUCTURE type or a LIST type. The parameters and their types are given in Clause 8.
9.3.52	Associated UE Information
This IE defines a set of applicable UEs for Query Service.
9.3.53		UE Filter ID
This IE defines an identifier for UE Filter Conditions.
9.3.54	UE Group ID
This IE defines an identifier to uniquely identify a UE group.
9.3.55	Entity Filter ID
This IE defines an identifier to uniquely identify an entity filter that defines the set of entities across the UEs in a UE group.
9.3.56	UE Group Definition
9.4	Information Element Abstract Syntax (with ASN.1)
9.4.1	General
E2SM-RC ASN.1 definition conforms to ITU-T Rec. X.680 [5] and ITU-T Rec. X.681 [6].
Sub clause 9.4.2 presents the Abstract Syntax of the E2SM information elements to be carried within the E2AP [3] protocol messages with ASN.1. In case there is contradiction between the ASN.1 definition in this sub clause and the tabular format in sub clause 9.2 and 9.3, the ASN.1 shall take precedence, except for the definition of conditions for the presence of conditional elements, in which the tabular format shall take precedence.
If an E2SM information element carried as an OCTET STRING in an E2AP [3] message that is not constructed as defined above is received, this shall be considered as Abstract Syntax Error, and the message shall be handled as defined for Abstract Syntax Error in clause 9.
9.4.2	Information Element Definitions
-- ASN1START
-- **************************************************************
-- E2SM-RC Information Element Definitions
-- **************************************************************
E2SM-RC-IEs {
iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) private(4) enterprise(1) oran(53148) e2(1) version1(1) e2sm(2) e2sm-RC-IEs (3)}
DEFINITIONS AUTOMATIC TAGS ::=
BEGIN
-- **************************************************************
-- E2SM Common IEs
-- **************************************************************
IMPORTS
CGI,
E-UTRA-ARFCN,
EUTRA-CGI,
E-UTRA-PCI,
E-UTRA-TAC,
FiveGS-TAC,
InterfaceIdentifier,
InterfaceType,
Interface-MessageID,
NRFrequencyInfo,
NR-CGI,
NR-PCI,
RANfunction-Name,
RIC-Format-Type,
RIC-Style-Name,
RIC-Style-Type,
RRC-MessageID,
ServingCell-ARFCN,
ServingCell-PCI,
UEID
FROM E2SM-COMMON-IEs;
-- *****************************************************
-- CONSTANTS
-- *****************************************************
maxnoofMessages							INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofE2InfoChanges					INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofUEInfoChanges					INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofRRCstate							INTEGER ::= 8
maxnoofParametersToReport				INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofPolicyConditions					INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters			INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofUEID								INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofCellID							INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofRANOutcomeParameters				INTEGER ::= 255
maxnoofParametersinStructure			INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofItemsinList						INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofUEInfo							INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofCellInfo							INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofUEeventInfo						INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofRANparamTest						INTEGER ::= 255
maxnoofNeighbourCell					INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofRICStyles						INTEGER ::= 63
maxnoofCallProcessTypes					INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofCallProcessBreakpoints			INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofInsertIndication					INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofControlAction					INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofPolicyAction						INTEGER ::= 65535
maxnoofInsertIndicationActions			INTEGER ::= 63
maxnoofMulCtrlActions					INTEGER ::= 63
maxGroupDefinitionIdentifierParameters	INTEGER ::= 255
maxnoofAssociatedEntityFilters			INTEGER ::= 255
maxnoofFormatTypes						INTEGER ::= 63
-- *****************************************************
-- IEs
-- *****************************************************
LogicalOR ::= ENUMERATED {true, false, ...}
NeighborCell-List ::= SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofNeighbourCell)) OF NeighborCell-Item
NeighborCell-Item ::= CHOICE {
ranType-Choice-NR					NeighborCell-Item-Choice-NR,
ranType-Choice-EUTRA				NeighborCell-Item-Choice-E-UTRA,
...
}
NeighborCell-Item-Choice-NR ::= SEQUENCE {
nR-CGI								NR-CGI,
nR-PCI								NR-PCI,
fiveGS-TAC							FiveGS-TAC,
nR-mode-info						ENUMERATED {fdd, tdd, ...},
nR-FreqInfo							NRFrequencyInfo,
x2-Xn-established					ENUMERATED {true, false, ...},
hO-validated						ENUMERATED {true, false, ...},
version								INTEGER (1..65535, ...),
...
}
NeighborCell-Item-Choice-E-UTRA ::= SEQUENCE {
eUTRA-CGI							EUTRA-CGI,
eUTRA-PCI							E-UTRA-PCI,
eUTRA-ARFCN							E-UTRA-ARFCN,
eUTRA-TAC							E-UTRA-TAC,
x2-Xn-established					ENUMERATED {true, false, ...},
hO-validated						ENUMERATED {true, false, ...},
version								INTEGER (1..65535, ...),
...
}
NeighborRelation-Info ::= SEQUENCE {
servingCellPCI						ServingCell-PCI,
servingCellARFCN					ServingCell-ARFCN,
neighborCell-List					NeighborCell-List,
...
}
RRC-State ::= ENUMERATED {rrc-connected, rrc-inactive, rrc-idle, any, ...}
-------------------------------
-- Event Trigger related IEs
-------------------------------
EventTrigger-Cell-Info ::= SEQUENCE {
cellInfo-List						SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofCellInfo)) OF EventTrigger-Cell-Info-Item,
...
}
EventTrigger-Cell-Info-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
eventTriggerCellID					RIC-EventTrigger-Cell-ID,
cellType							CHOICE {
cellType-Choice-Individual		EventTrigger-Cell-Info-Item-Choice-Individual,
cellType-Choice-Group			EventTrigger-Cell-Info-Item-Choice-Group,
...
},
logicalOR							LogicalOR 							OPTIONAL,
...
}
EventTrigger-Cell-Info-Item-Choice-Individual ::= SEQUENCE {
cellGlobalID						CGI,
...
}
EventTrigger-Cell-Info-Item-Choice-Group ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameterTesting				RANParameter-Testing,
...
}
EventTrigger-UE-Info ::= SEQUENCE {
ueInfo-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofUEInfo)) OF EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item,
...
}
EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
eventTriggerUEID					RIC-EventTrigger-UE-ID,
ueType								CHOICE {
ueType-Choice-Individual		EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item-Choice-Individual,
ueType-Choice-Group				EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item-Choice-Group,
...
},
logicalOR							LogicalOR 							OPTIONAL,
...
}
EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item-Choice-Individual ::= SEQUENCE {
ueID								UEID,
ranParameterTesting					RANParameter-Testing				OPTIONAL,
...
}
EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item-Choice-Group ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameterTesting			RANParameter-Testing,
...
}
EventTrigger-UEevent-Info ::= SEQUENCE {
ueEvent-List						SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofUEeventInfo)) OF EventTrigger-UEevent-Info-Item,
...
}
EventTrigger-UEevent-Info-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ueEventID							RIC-EventTrigger-UEevent-ID,
logicalOR							LogicalOR 							OPTIONAL,
...
}
-------------------------------
-- RAN Parameter related IEs
-------------------------------
RANParameter-ID 	::= INTEGER (1..4294967295, ...)
RANParameter-Name ::= PrintableString (SIZE(1..150, ...))
RANParameter-Definition ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-Definition-Choice		RANParameter-Definition-Choice,
...
}
RANParameter-Definition-Choice ::= CHOICE {
choiceLIST							RANParameter-Definition-Choice-LIST,
choiceSTRUCTURE						RANParameter-Definition-Choice-STRUCTURE,
...
}
RANParameter-Definition-Choice-LIST ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofItemsinList)) OF RANParameter-Definition-Choice-LIST-Item,
...
}
RANParameter-Definition-Choice-LIST-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL,
...
}
RANParameter-Definition-Choice-STRUCTURE ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-STRUCTURE				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofParametersinStructure)) OF RANParameter-Definition-Choice-STRUCTURE-Item,
...
}
RANParameter-Definition-Choice-STRUCTURE-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL,
...
}
RANParameter-Value ::= CHOICE {
valueBoolean						BOOLEAN,
valueInt							INTEGER,
valueReal							REAL,
valueBitS							BIT STRING,
valueOctS							OCTET STRING,
valuePrintableString				PrintableString,
...
}
RANParameter-ValueType ::= CHOICE {
ranP-Choice-ElementTrue			RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-ElementTrue,
ranP-Choice-ElementFalse		RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-ElementFalse,
ranP-Choice-Structure			RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-Structure,
ranP-Choice-List				RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-List,
...
}
RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-ElementTrue ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-value			RANParameter-Value,
...
}
RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-ElementFalse ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-value			RANParameter-Value 			OPTIONAL,
-- C-ifControl: This IE shall be present if it is part of a RIC Control Request message. Otherwise it is optional.
...
}
RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-Structure ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-Structure			RANParameter-STRUCTURE,
...
}
RANParameter-ValueType-Choice-List ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-List				RANParameter-LIST,
...
}
RANParameter-STRUCTURE ::= SEQUENCE {
sequence-of-ranParameters		SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofParametersinStructure)) OF RANParameter-STRUCTURE-Item		OPTIONAL,
...
}
RANParameter-STRUCTURE-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
RANParameter-LIST ::= SEQUENCE {
list-of-ranParameter				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofItemsinList)) OF RANParameter-STRUCTURE,
...
}
RANParameter-Testing ::= SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRANparamTest)) OF RANParameter-Testing-Item
RANParameter-TestingCondition ::= CHOICE {
ranP-Choice-comparison				ENUMERATED {equal, difference, greaterthan, lessthan, contains, starts-with, ...},
ranP-Choice-presence				ENUMERATED {present, configured, rollover, non-zero, ..., value-change},
...
}
RANParameter-Testing-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-Type					CHOICE {
ranP-Choice-List				RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-List,
ranP-Choice-Structure			RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-Structure,
ranP-Choice-ElementTrue			RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-ElementTrue,
ranP-Choice-ElementFalse		RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-ElementFalse,
...
},
...
}
RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-List ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-List					RANParameter-Testing-LIST,
...
}
RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-Structure ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-Structure				RANParameter-Testing-STRUCTURE,
...
}
RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-ElementTrue ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-value					RANParameter-Value,
...
}
RANParameter-Testing-Item-Choice-ElementFalse ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-TestCondition			RANParameter-TestingCondition,
ranParameter-Value					RANParameter-Value 					OPTIONAL,
logicalOR							LogicalOR							OPTIONAL,
...
}
RANParameter-Testing-LIST ::= SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofItemsinList)) OF RANParameter-Testing-Item
RANParameter-Testing-STRUCTURE ::= SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofParametersinStructure)) OF RANParameter-Testing-Item
UE-Group-Definition ::= SEQUENCE {
ueGroupDefinitionIdentifier-LIST SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxGroupDefinitionIdentifierParameters)) OF UEGroupDefinitionIdentifier-Item,
...
}
UEGroupDefinitionIdentifier-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
logicalOR							LogicalOR							OPTIONAL,
...
}
----------------------------
-- RIC Service related IEs
----------------------------
RAN-CallProcess-ID ::= INTEGER (1..4294967295, ...)
RIC-CallProcessType-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-CallProcessType-Name ::= PrintableString (SIZE(1..150, ...))
RIC-CallProcessBreakpoint-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-CallProcessBreakpoint-Name ::= PrintableString (SIZE(1..150, ...))
RIC-ControlAction-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-ControlAction-Name ::= PrintableString (SIZE(1..150, ...))
RIC-EventTriggerCondition-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-EventTrigger-UE-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-EventTrigger-UEevent-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-EventTrigger-Cell-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-InsertIndication-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
RIC-InsertIndication-Name ::= PrintableString (SIZE(1..150, ...))
UE-Group-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
EntityFilter-ID ::=	INTEGER (1..255, ...)
RIC-PolicyAction ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-PolicyAction-ID					RIC-ControlAction-ID,
ranParameters-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF RIC-PolicyAction-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
...,
ric-PolicyDecision					ENUMERATED {accept, reject, ...}			OPTIONAL
}
RIC-PolicyAction-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
UE-Filter-ID ::= INTEGER (1..65535, ...)
Associated-UE-Info ::= SEQUENCE {
associatedUEInfo-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofUEInfo)) OF Associated-UE-Info-Item,
...
}
Associated-UE-Info-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ueFilterID							UE-Filter-ID,
ueType								CHOICE {
ueType-Choice-Individual		EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item-Choice-Individual,
ueType-Choice-Group				EventTrigger-UE-Info-Item-Choice-Group,
...
},
logicalOR							LogicalOR 							OPTIONAL,
...
}
-- **************************************************************
-- E2SM-RC Service Model IEs
-- **************************************************************
-- ***************************************************
-- Event Trigger OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-eventTrigger-formats					CHOICE {
eventTrigger-Format1					E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format1,
eventTrigger-Format2					E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format2,
eventTrigger-Format3					E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format3,
eventTrigger-Format4					E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format4,
eventTrigger-Format5					NULL,
...
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
message-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofMessages)) OF E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format1-Item,
globalAssociatedUEInfo					EventTrigger-UE-Info					OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format1-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-eventTriggerCondition-ID		RIC-EventTriggerCondition-ID,
messageType							MessageType-Choice,
messageDirection					ENUMERATED {incoming, outgoing, ...}	OPTIONAL,
associatedUEInfo					EventTrigger-UE-Info					OPTIONAL,
associatedUEEvent					EventTrigger-UEevent-Info				OPTIONAL,
logicalOR							LogicalOR								OPTIONAL,
...
}
MessageType-Choice ::= CHOICE {
messageType-Choice-NI					MessageType-Choice-NI,
messageType-Choice-RRC					MessageType-Choice-RRC,
...
}
MessageType-Choice-NI ::= SEQUENCE {
nI-Type									InterfaceType,
nI-Identifier							InterfaceIdentifier				OPTIONAL,
nI-Message								Interface-MessageID				OPTIONAL,
...
}
MessageType-Choice-RRC ::= SEQUENCE {
rRC-Message								RRC-MessageID,
...
}
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-callProcessType-ID				RIC-CallProcessType-ID,
ric-callProcessBreakpoint-ID		RIC-CallProcessBreakpoint-ID,
associatedE2NodeInfo				RANParameter-Testing					OPTIONAL,
associatedUEInfo					EventTrigger-UE-Info					OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format3 ::= SEQUENCE {
e2NodeInfoChange-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofE2InfoChanges)) OF E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format3-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format3-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-eventTriggerCondition-ID		RIC-EventTriggerCondition-ID,
e2NodeInfoChange-ID					INTEGER (1..512, ...),
associatedCellInfo					EventTrigger-Cell-Info			OPTIONAL,
logicalOR							LogicalOR						OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format4 ::= SEQUENCE {
uEInfoChange-List						SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofUEInfoChanges)) OF E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format4-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-EventTrigger-Format4-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-eventTriggerCondition-ID		RIC-EventTriggerCondition-ID,
triggerType							TriggerType-Choice,
associatedUEInfo					EventTrigger-UE-Info					OPTIONAL,
logicalOR							LogicalOR								OPTIONAL,
...
}
TriggerType-Choice ::= CHOICE {
triggerType-Choice-RRCstate		TriggerType-Choice-RRCstate,
triggerType-Choice-UEID			TriggerType-Choice-UEID,
triggerType-Choice-L2state		TriggerType-Choice-L2state,
...,
triggerType-Choice-UEcontext	TriggerType-Choice-UEcontext,
triggerType-Choice-L2MACschChg	TriggerType-Choice-L2MACschChg
}
TriggerType-Choice-RRCstate ::= SEQUENCE {
rrcState-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRRCstate)) OF TriggerType-Choice-RRCstate-Item,
...
}
TriggerType-Choice-RRCstate-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
stateChangedTo							RRC-State,
logicalOR								LogicalOR						OPTIONAL,
...
}
TriggerType-Choice-UEID ::= SEQUENCE {
ueIDchange-ID							INTEGER (1..512, ...),
...
}
TriggerType-Choice-L2state ::= SEQUENCE {
associatedL2variables					RANParameter-Testing,
...
}
TriggerType-Choice-UEcontext ::= SEQUENCE {
associatedUECtxtVariables				RANParameter-Testing,
...
}
TriggerType-Choice-L2MACschChg ::= SEQUENCE {
l2MACschChgType							L2MACschChgType-Choice,
...
}
L2MACschChgType-Choice ::= CHOICE {
triggerType-Choice-MIMOandBFconfig		TriggerType-Choice-MIMOandBFconfig,
...
}
TriggerType-Choice-MIMOandBFconfig ::= SEQUENCE {
mIMOtransModeState						ENUMERATED {enabled, disabled, ...},
...
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Action Definition OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-Style-Type							RIC-Style-Type,
ric-actionDefinition-formats			CHOICE {
actionDefinition-Format1			E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format1,
actionDefinition-Format2			E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format2,
actionDefinition-Format3			E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format3,
...,
actionDefinition-Format4			E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ranP-ToBeReported-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofParametersToReport)) OF E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format1-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format1-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition				OPTIONAL
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-PolicyConditions-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofPolicyConditions)) OF E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format2-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format2-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-PolicyAction						RIC-PolicyAction,
ric-PolicyConditionDefinition			RANParameter-Testing			OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format3 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertIndication-ID					RIC-InsertIndication-ID,
ranP-InsertIndication-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format3-Item,
ueID									UEID					OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format3-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition			OPTIONAL
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1.. maxnoofRICStyles)) OF E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4-Style-Item,
ueID									UEID					OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4-Style-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
requested-Insert-Style-Type				RIC-Style-Type,
ric-InsertIndication-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofInsertIndicationActions)) OF E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4-Indication-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4-Indication-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertIndication-ID					RIC-InsertIndication-ID,
ranP-InsertIndication-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4-RANP-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ActionDefinition-Format4-RANP-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID							RANParameter-ID,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition				OPTIONAL
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Indication Header OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-IndicationHeader ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-indicationHeader-formats		CHOICE {
indicationHeader-Format1			E2SM-RC-IndicationHeader-Format1,
indicationHeader-Format2			E2SM-RC-IndicationHeader-Format2,
...,
indicationHeader-Format3			E2SM-RC-IndicationHeader-Format3
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationHeader-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-eventTriggerCondition-ID		RIC-EventTriggerCondition-ID 		OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationHeader-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ueID								UEID,
ric-InsertStyle-Type				RIC-Style-Type,
ric-InsertIndication-ID				RIC-InsertIndication-ID,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationHeader-Format3 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-eventTriggerCondition-ID		RIC-EventTriggerCondition-ID 		OPTIONAL,
ueID								UEID								OPTIONAL,
...
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Indication Message OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-indicationMessage-formats		CHOICE {
indicationMessage-Format1			E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format1,
indicationMessage-Format2			E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format2,
indicationMessage-Format3			E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format3,
indicationMessage-Format4			NULL,
indicationMessage-Format5			E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format5,
...,
indicationMessage-Format6			E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ranP-Reported-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format1-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format1-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ueParameter-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofUEID)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format2-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format2-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ueID								UEID,
ranP-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format2-RANParameter-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format2-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format3 ::= SEQUENCE {
cellInfo-List						SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofCellID)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format3-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format3-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
cellGlobal-ID						CGI,
cellContextInfo						OCTET STRING 					OPTIONAL,
cellDeleted							BOOLEAN							OPTIONAL,
neighborRelation-Table				NeighborRelation-Info		OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format5 ::= SEQUENCE{
ranP-Requested-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format5-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format5-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1.. maxnoofRICStyles)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6-Style-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6-Style-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
indicated-Insert-Style-Type				RIC-Style-Type,
ric-InsertIndication-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofInsertIndicationActions)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6-Indication-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6-Indication-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertIndication-ID					RIC-InsertIndication-ID,
ranP-InsertIndication-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6-RANP-Item	,
...
}
E2SM-RC-IndicationMessage-Format6-RANP-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID							RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType					RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
-- **************************************************
-- Call Process ID OCTET STRING contents
-- **************************************************
E2SM-RC-CallProcessID ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-callProcessID-formats		CHOICE {
callProcessID-Format1			E2SM-RC-CallProcessID-Format1,
...
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-CallProcessID-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-callProcess-ID			RAN-CallProcess-ID,
...
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Control Header OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-ControlHeader ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-controlHeader-formats			CHOICE {
controlHeader-Format1		E2SM-RC-ControlHeader-Format1,
...,
controlHeader-Format2				E2SM-RC-ControlHeader-Format2,
controlHeader-Format3				E2SM-RC-ControlHeader-Format3
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlHeader-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ueID								UEID,
ric-Style-Type						RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ControlAction-ID				RIC-ControlAction-ID,
ric-ControlDecision					ENUMERATED {accept, reject, ...}			OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlHeader-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ueID								UEID										OPTIONAL,
ric-ControlDecision					ENUMERATED {accept, reject, ...}			OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlHeader-Format3 ::= SEQUENCE {
ue-Group-ID							UE-Group-ID,
ue-Group-Definition					UE-Group-Definition,
ric-Style-Type						RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ControlAction-ID				RIC-ControlAction-ID,
...
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Control Message OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-ControlMessage ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-controlMessage-formats			CHOICE {
controlMessage-Format1			E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format1,
...,
controlMessage-Format2				E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format2,
controlMessage-Format3				E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format3
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ranP-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format1-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format1-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1.. maxnoofRICStyles)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format2-Style-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format2-Style-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
indicated-Control-Style-Type			RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ControlAction-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofMulCtrlActions)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format2-ControlAction-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format2-ControlAction-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlAction-ID					RIC-ControlAction-ID,
ranP-List								E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format1,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlMessage-Format3 ::= SEQUENCE {
listOfEntityFilters						SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofAssociatedEntityFilters)) OF E2SM-RC-EntityFilter		OPTIONAL,
entityAgnosticControlRanP-List						SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF EntityAgnostic-ranP-ControlParameters		OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-EntityFilter ::= SEQUENCE {
entityFilter-ID						EntityFilter-ID,
entityFilter-Definition				RANParameter-Testing,
entitySpecificControlRanP-List						SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF EntitySpecific-ranP-ControlParameters,
...
}
EntityAgnostic-ranP-ControlParameters ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
EntitySpecific-ranP-ControlParameters ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
-- ****************************************************
-- Control Outcome OCTET STRING contents
-- ****************************************************
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-controlOutcome-formats		CHOICE {
controlOutcome-Format1		E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format1,
...,
controlOutcome-Format2			E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2,
controlOutcome-Format3			E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format3	},
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ranP-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofRANOutcomeParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format1-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format1-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID					RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-value				RANParameter-Value,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1.. maxnoofRICStyles)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2-Style-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2-Style-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
indicated-Control-Style-Type			RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ControlOutcome-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofMulCtrlActions)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2-ControlOutcome-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2-ControlOutcome-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlAction-ID					RIC-ControlAction-ID,
ranP-List								SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2-RANP-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format2-RANP-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID							RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-value						RANParameter-Value,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format3 ::= SEQUENCE {
ranP-List								SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofRANOutcomeParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format3-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-ControlOutcome-Format3-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID							RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType					RANParameter-ValueType,
...
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Query Header OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-QueryHeader ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-queryHeader-formats			CHOICE {
queryHeader-Format1				E2SM-RC-QueryHeader-Format1,
...
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryHeader-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-Style-Type						RIC-Style-Type,
associatedE2NodeInfo				RANParameter-Testing				OPTIONAL,
associatedUEInfo					Associated-UE-Info					OPTIONAL,
...
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Query Definition OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-QueryDefinition ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-queryDefinition-formats			CHOICE {
queryRequest-Format1			E2SM-RC-QueryDefinition-Format1,
...
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryDefinition-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
ranP-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-QueryDefinition-Format1-Item,
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryDefinition-Format1-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition				OPTIONAL,
...
}
-- ***************************************************
-- Query Outcome OCTET STRING contents
-- ***************************************************
E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-queryOutcome-formats			CHOICE {
queryOutcome-Format1			E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format1,
queryOutcome-Format2			E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format2,
...
},
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format1 ::= SEQUENCE {
cellInfo-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofCellID)) OF E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format1-ItemCell,
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format1-ItemCell ::= SEQUENCE {
cellGlobal-ID						CGI,
ranP-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format1-ItemParameters,
neighborRelation-Table				NeighborRelation-Info		OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format1-ItemParameters ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType		OPTIONAL,
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format2 ::= SEQUENCE {
ueInfo-List								SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofUEID)) OF E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format2-ItemUE,
...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format2-ItemUE::= SEQUENCE {
ueID								UEID,
ranP-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format2-ItemParameters,
ueFilterID							UE-Filter-ID				OPTIONAL,	...
}
E2SM-RC-QueryOutcome-Format2-ItemParameters ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-valueType				RANParameter-ValueType		OPTIONAL,
...
}
-- **************************************************************
-- RAN Function Definition IEs
-- **************************************************************
E2SM-RC-RANFunctionDefinition ::= SEQUENCE{
ranFunction-Name						RANfunction-Name,
ranFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger		RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger			OPTIONAL,
ranFunctionDefinition-Report			RANFunctionDefinition-Report				OPTIONAL,
ranFunctionDefinition-Insert			RANFunctionDefinition-Insert				OPTIONAL,
ranFunctionDefinition-Control			RANFunctionDefinition-Control				OPTIONAL,
ranFunctionDefinition-Policy			RANFunctionDefinition-Policy				OPTIONAL,
...,
ranFunctionDefinition-Query				RANFunctionDefinition-Query					OPTIONAL
}
-------------------------------
-- Event Trigger
-------------------------------
RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-EventTriggerStyle-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRICStyles)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger-Style-Item,
ran-L2Parameters-List 					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF L2Parameters-RANParameter-Item			OPTIONAL,
ran-CallProcessTypes-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofCallProcessTypes)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger-CallProcess-Item 		OPTIONAL,
ran-UEIdentificationParameters-List		SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF UEIdentification-RANParameter-Item 		OPTIONAL,
ran-CellIdentificationParameters-List	SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF CellIdentification-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger-Style-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-EventTriggerStyle-Type				RIC-Style-Type,
ric-EventTriggerStyle-Name				RIC-Style-Name,
ric-EventTriggerFormat-Type				RIC-Format-Type,
...
}
L2Parameters-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID							RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name						RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition					RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
UEIdentification-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
CellIdentification-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger-CallProcess-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
callProcessType-ID						RIC-CallProcessType-ID,
callProcessType-Name					RIC-CallProcessType-Name,
callProcessBreakpoints-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofCallProcessBreakpoints)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger-Breakpoint-Item,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-EventTrigger-Breakpoint-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
callProcessBreakpoint-ID					RIC-CallProcessBreakpoint-ID,
callProcessBreakpoint-Name					RIC-CallProcessBreakpoint-Name,
ran-CallProcessBreakpointParameters-List	SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF CallProcessBreakpoint-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
...
}
CallProcessBreakpoint-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
-------------------------------
-- Report
-------------------------------
RANFunctionDefinition-Report ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ReportStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRICStyles)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-Report-Item,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Report-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ReportStyle-Type					RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ReportStyle-Name					RIC-Style-Name,
ric-SupportedEventTriggerStyle-Type		RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ReportActionFormat-Type				RIC-Format-Type,
ric-IndicationHeaderFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ric-IndicationMessageFormat-Type		RIC-Format-Type,
ran-ReportParameters-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF  Report-RANParameter-Item			OPTIONAL,
...
}
Report-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
-------------------------------
-- Insert
-------------------------------
RANFunctionDefinition-Insert ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertStyle-List							SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRICStyles)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-Insert-Item,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Insert-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertStyle-Type						RIC-Style-Type,
ric-InsertStyle-Name						RIC-Style-Name,
ric-SupportedEventTriggerStyle-Type			RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ActionDefinitionFormat-Type				RIC-Format-Type,
ric-InsertIndication-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofInsertIndication)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-Insert-Indication-Item 	OPTIONAL,
ric-IndicationHeaderFormat-Type				RIC-Format-Type,
ric-IndicationMessageFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ric-CallProcessIDFormat-Type				RIC-Format-Type,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Insert-Indication-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-InsertIndication-ID						RIC-InsertIndication-ID,
ric-InsertIndication-Name					RIC-InsertIndication-Name,
ran-InsertIndicationParameters-List		SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF InsertIndication-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
...
}
InsertIndication-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
-------------------------------
-- Control
-------------------------------
RANFunctionDefinition-Control ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRICStyles)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-Control-Item,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Control-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlStyle-Type						RIC-Style-Type,
ric-ControlStyle-Name						RIC-Style-Name,
ric-ControlAction-List						SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofControlAction)) OF  RANFunctionDefinition-Control-Action-Item	OPTIONAL,
ric-ControlHeaderFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ric-ControlMessageFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ric-CallProcessIDFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type				OPTIONAL,
ric-ControlOutcomeFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ran-ControlOutcomeParameters-List	SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRANOutcomeParameters)) OF ControlOutcome-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
...,
listOfAdditionalSupportedFormats-UEGroupControl		ListOfAdditionalSupportedFormats-UEGroupControl	OPTIONAL}
ControlOutcome-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Control-Action-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlAction-ID					RIC-ControlAction-ID,
ric-ControlAction-Name					RIC-ControlAction-Name,
ran-ControlActionParameters-List		SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF ControlAction-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
...,
ueGroup-ControlAction-Supported			ENUMERATED {true, false, ...}
}
ControlAction-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
ListOfAdditionalSupportedFormats-UEGroupControl ::= SEQUENCE (SIZE(0..maxnoofFormatTypes)) OF AdditionalSupportedFormat-UEGroupControl
AdditionalSupportedFormat-UEGroupControl ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-ControlHeaderFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ric-ControlMessageFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
...,
ric-ControlOutcomeFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type		OPTIONAL
}
-------------------------------
-- Policy
-------------------------------
RANFunctionDefinition-Policy ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-PolicyStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRICStyles)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-Policy-Item,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Policy-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-PolicyStyle-Type 					RIC-Style-Type,
ric-PolicyStyle-Name					RIC-Style-Name,
ric-SupportedEventTriggerStyle-Type		RIC-Style-Type,
ric-PolicyAction-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofPolicyAction)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-Policy-Action-Item	OPTIONAL,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Policy-Action-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-PolicyAction-ID						RIC-ControlAction-ID,
ric-PolicyAction-Name					RIC-ControlAction-Name,
ric-ActionDefinitionFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ran-PolicyActionParameters-List			SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF PolicyAction-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
ran-PolicyConditionParameters-List		SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF PolicyCondition-RANParameter-Item		OPTIONAL,
...
}
PolicyAction-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
PolicyCondition-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
...,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL
}
-------------------------------
-- Query
-------------------------------
RANFunctionDefinition-Query ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-QueryStyle-List					SEQUENCE (SIZE(1..maxnoofRICStyles)) OF RANFunctionDefinition-Query-Item,
...
}
RANFunctionDefinition-Query-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ric-QueryStyle-Type						RIC-Style-Type,
ric-QueryStyle-Name						RIC-Style-Name,
ric-QueryHeaderFormat-Type				RIC-Format-Type,
ric-QueryDefinitionFormat-Type				RIC-Format-Type,
ric-QueryOutcomeFormat-Type			RIC-Format-Type,
ran-QueryParameters-List				SEQUENCE (SIZE (1..maxnoofAssociatedRANParameters)) OF  Query-RANParameter-Item			OPTIONAL,
...
}
Query-RANParameter-Item ::= SEQUENCE {
ranParameter-ID						RANParameter-ID,
ranParameter-name					RANParameter-Name,
ranParameter-Definition				RANParameter-Definition		OPTIONAL,
...
}
END
-- ASN1STOP
9.5	Message transfer syntax
E2SM-RC shall use the ASN.1 Basic Packed Encoding Rules (BASIC-PER) Aligned Variant as transfer syntax, as specified in ITU-T Rec. X.691 [9].
10		Handling of Unknown, Unforeseen and Erroneous Protocol Data
Clause 10 of TS 36.413 [13] is applicable for the purposes of the present document.
Annex A (Informative):
Examples on IE Contents
A.1	Introduction
This annex presents example applications of selected use cases showing alternative solutions using different combinations of RIC Services Report, Insert, Control and/or Policy.
A.2	Connected mode mobility based on UE measurement report
A.2.1	Assumptions
This example is based on the following assumptions:
1	E2 Node, of type O-CU-CP, O-CU or gNB for aggregated deployments, has E2 interface to Near-RT RIC and supports one or more RIC services using E2SM-RC.
2	UE is in RRC CONNECTED state using NR access and has successfully attached to a 5G Core Network (5GC)
3	UE has been previously configured to send RRC Measurement Reports.
4	UE sends a RRC Measurement Report containing one or more neighbour cell measurements applicable for an inter-cell connected mode mobility event (i.e. a Handover)
5	E2 Node for aggregated deployments, uses one or more RIC Services to complete the handover decision and either execute handover (i.e. using procedure described in 3GPP 38.300 clause 9.2.3) or ignores measurement report.
Step 5 may be realized using one or more of the following solutions:
i)	According to a previously established RIC Subscription procedure, the arrival of the RRC Measurement Report triggers an Event Trigger which results in the E2 Node suspending the ongoing call process and sending a RIC Service INSERT message to the Near-RT RIC.  The Near-RT RIC takes the Handover Decision and sends a RIC Service CONTROL message carrying the response which is used by the E2 node to resume the call process.
ii)	According to a previously established RIC Subscription procedure the arrival of the RRC Measurement Report triggers an Event Trigger which results in the E2 Node executing a RIC Service POLICY which is used to modify the default Handover Decision and so modifies the remaining steps in the ongoing call process.
A.2.2	Solution using RIC Services Insert and Control
A.2.2.0	Introduction
This section provides a solution for the Connected Mode Mobility event call flow using the RIC Service Insert (Style 3) and Control (Style 3) required for the handling of incoming RRC Measurement reports from a UE connected to a 5GC network using Standalone (SA) access.  Corresponding example message content are provided for the RIC Event Trigger Definition IE and RIC Action Definition IE, used to set up the RIC Subscription for the Insert service, the RIC Indication Header IE and RIC Indication Message IE, used to send the Insert message to the Near-RT RIC and finally the RIC Control Header IE, RIC Control Message IE and RIC Control Outcome IE contents, used by the resulting RIC Control procedure to respond to the Insert message.
A.2.2.1	Assumptions
This example is based on the following design assumptions:
1	Event trigger defined using Style 2 (Call Process Breakpoint), Type 3 (Mobility Management) and Call Breakpoint ID 1 (Handover Preparation) with the assumption that this breakpoint corresponds to the point of the UE call process code in a gNB where a handover decision is to be taken based on a received RRC Measurement report.
a.	Event Trigger Definition Format 2 IE RAN parameters for Associated UE Info IE are used to offer filtering of UE between UE subject to Insert service and UE to be handled using E2 Node internal mechanisms.  In this example RAN parameters for discrimination based on Slice and Group (aka SPID) along with optional use of Explicit UE List membership are described (see A.2.2.2).
2	Insert service, defined according to Insert Style 3 (Connected Mobile Mobility), Indication ID 1 (Handover control request), is defined using RIC Action Definition Format 3 IE.  In this example a single target primary cell along with lists of PDU, DRB and secondary cells to be handed over are described (see A.2.2.3)
3	Insert message defined according to Insert Style 3 (Connected Mobile Mobility), Indication ID 1 (Handover control request) with RIC Indication Header Format 2 IE, RIC Indication Message Format 5 IE and RIC Call Process ID Format 1 IE.  In this example the insert message, used to carry preliminary handover decision made by E2 Node (target primary cell selected and proposed lists of retained DRBs and secondary cells), is described (see A.2.2.4)
4	Control message defined according to Control Style 3 (Connected Mobile Mobility), Control Action ID 1 (Handover control) with RIC Control Header Format 1 IE,  RIC Control Message Format 1 IE, RIC Call Process ID Format 1 IE and RIC Control Outcome Format 1 IE, may be sent based on the outcome of the decision in the Near-RT RIC.  Message is used to carry confirmed handover decision made by E2 Node (confirmed target primary cell and confirmed lists of retained DRBs and secondary cells).
The gNB may either:
a.	Use the RIC Call Process ID IE to identify the target UE and decide to accept the RIC Control request.  The E2 Node may then proceed with handover execution using information obtained from the measurement report, stored UE context information and contents of the RIC Control Request message (RIC Control Header IE and RIC Control Message IE) result of subsequent network transactions
b.	Wait for the Time To Wait timer to expire and continue with any other required call processing, ignoring the measurement report
5	RIC Control Outcome IE carried in RIC Control Acknowledge message, defined using Control Style 3 (Connected Mobile Mobility), Control Action ID 1 (Handover control), may be sent based on the outcome of the decision in the E2 Node
@startuml
Skin rose
skinparam ParticipantPadding 50
skinparam BoxPadding 10
skinparam lifelineStrategy solid
Participant “Near-RT RIC” as RIC
Participant "gNB" as gNB
Participant "UE" as UE
== Establish RIC subscriptions ==
RIC<->gNB: <color green>RIC SUBSCRIPTION (Insert: Handover measurement report)
RIC<-->gNB: <color green>RIC CONTROL (UE assignment to Explicit UE List)
loop While Subscription remains active
== Handover decision ==
UE->>gNB: RRC Measurement report
gNB->gNB: Handover decision
gNB->gNB : <color green>Call Process Breakpoint
gNB->gNB: <color green>Event Trigger (test conditions)
alt #lime Event Trigger Condition applies
note over gNB #pink: Associated procedure instance **suspended**    note over gNB #aqua: Start associated Time to Wait Timer
gNB->RIC: RIC Indication (Insert) based on Action Definition \ncontaining preliminary handover decision
alt #lime Near-RT RIC __responds in time__
RIC->RIC: Confirm preliminary handover decision and downselect \nretained DRBs and S-cells if required
RIC->gNB: RIC Control request (handover information)
note over gNB #pink: Associated procedure instance **recovered**
gNB->gNB: Modify handover decision \naccording to Control request
gNB-->RIC: RIC Control Acknowledge
else Time to Wait timer Expires and Subsequent Action = __Continue__
note over gNB #aqua: Associated Time to Wait Timer expires
note over gNB #pink: Associated procedure instance **recovered**
end
end
alt Handover decision = TRUE
gNB<->UE: Execute handover
else Handover decision = FALSE
gNB->gNB: Ignore measurement report
end
end
@enduml
Figure A.2.2.1-1: Example call flow for Handover preparation and execution with extensions added to implement RIC Insert and RIC Control service in GREEN
A.2.2.2	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE contents
RIC Event Trigger Definition Format 2 IE contains RAN Parameter lists for Associated E2 Node Info IE and Associated UE info IE.
In this example:
1)	Associated E2 Node Info IE, using RAN Parameters from clause 8.1.2.3.1, is not used.
2)	Associated UE Info IE, using RAN Parameters from clause 8.1.3, is used where the set of target UEs for the event is defined by a given slice (SST=sst1, SD=sd1) and group (IRFSP=irfsp1) along with membership to an optional Explicit UE list.  Additional sets of target UEs may be supported using the same RAN Parameter list with different target values for SST, SD and IRFSP and optionally Explicit UE List.  In addition, individual target UE may be identified. These selection criteria would be combined within the Event Trigger UE Information IE using the optional "Logical OR" flag (see clause 9.3.26).
RAN Parameter Testing for Call Process Breakpoint (defined in 8.1.2.3.1), used to populate the Associated E2 Node Info IE, are as follows:
RAN Parameter Testing for UE Group (defined in 8.1.3), used to populate the Associated UE Info IE, are as follows:
A.2.2.3	RIC Action Definition IE contents
RIC Action Definition Format 3 IE used to define Insert service contains a single RAN Parameter list for the selection of information such as Target Primary Cell, List of PDU sessions to be handed over and List of DRBs to be handed over.  This information is to be reported to Near-RT RIC within the INSERT message.
RAN parameters for Insert service (according to clause 8.3.4.1, these are defined in clause 8.4.4.1), used to populate the List of RAN parameters for Insert Indication IE, are as follows:
A.2.2.4	RIC Indication Message
RAN Parameters for Connected Mode Mobility Control (according to clause 8.3.4.1 these are defined in clause8.4.4.1), used to populate the RIC Indication Message Format 5 IE, are the same as those defined in A.2.2.3 above.
NOTE: Only one target primary cell is supported in the current version of this specification.
A.2.2.5	RIC Control Message
RAN Parameters for Connected Mode Mobility Control (according to clause 8.3.4.1 these are defined in 8.4.4.1), used to populate the RIC Control Message Format 1 IE, are the same as those defined in A.2.2.3 above.
A.2.3	Solution using RIC Service Policy ("Offset" based approach)
A.2.3.0	Introduction
This section provides a solution for the Connected Mode Mobility event call flow using the RIC Service Policy using the “Offset” approach.  Corresponding example message content are provided for the RIC Event Trigger Definition IE and RIC Action Definition IE contents for the Connected Mode Mobility service (Policy Style 3) sent from the RIC to the E2 node to establish a policy used to provide guidance for the handling of incoming RRC Measurement reports from a UE connected to a 5GC network using Standalone (SA) access.
A.2.3.1	Assumptions
This example is based on the following design assumptions:
1	Event trigger defined using Style 2 (Call Process Breakpoint), Type 3 (Mobility Management) and Call Breakpoint ID 1 (handover Preparation) with the assumption that this breakpoint corresponds to the point of the UE call process code in a gNB where a handover decision is to be taken based on a received RRC Measurement report.
a.	E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 2 IE RAN parameters for Associated E2 Node Info IE are not used
b.	E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 2 IE RAN parameters for Associated UE Info IE are used to offer filtering of UE between those subject to Policy handling and those to be handled using default parameters.  In this example RAN parameters for discrimination based on Slice and Group (aka SPID) are described.
2	Policy defined using Style 3 (Connected Mobile Mobility), Policy Action ID 1 (Policy for Handover control) and installed using RIC Subscription procedure containing E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE:
a.	Policy Condition Definition IE RAN parameters used to map UE to an appropriate Policy Action.  In this example RAN parameters based on Serving Cell and Explicit UE List membership are described.
b.	Policy Action IE parameters used to define a set of offsets (+positive, zero or -negative values) to be applied to default measurement thresholds to calculate policy modified threshold used during Handover decision prior to Handover execution.
3	Depending upon the outcome of the decision the gNB either:
a.	Proceeds with handover execution using information obtained from the measurement report, stored UE context information and result of subsequent network transactions
b.	Ignores measurement report and continues any other required call processing
@startuml
Skin rose
skinparam ParticipantPadding 50
skinparam BoxPadding 10
skinparam lifelineStrategy solid
Participant “Near-RT RIC” as RIC
Participant "gNB" as gNB
Participant "UE" as UE
== Establish RIC subscriptions ==
RIC<->gNB: <color green>RIC SUBSCRIPTION (Policy: Handover decision)
RIC<-->gNB: <color green>RIC CONTROL (UE assignment to Explicit UE List)
loop While Subscription remains active
== Handover decision ==
UE->>gNB: 1) RRC Measurement report
gNB->gNB : <color green>Call Process Breakpoint
gNB->gNB: <color green>Event Trigger (test conditions)
alt #lime Event Trigger Condition applies
alt #lime Policy condition applies (first match in list)
gNB->gNB: Extract offset value(s) from Policy Action
else no Policy condition applies
gNB->gNB: Set offset value(s) to zero
end
else Event Trigger condition does not apply
gNB->gNB :  Set offset value(s) to zero
end
gNB->gNB: Handover decision using default threshold <color green>modified \n<color green>according to offset value(s) in policy action </color>
alt Handover decision = TRUE
gNB<->UE: Execute handover
else Handover decision = FALSE
gNB->gNB: Ignore measurement report
end
end
@enduml
Figure A.2.3.1-1: Example call flow for Handover preparation with extensions added to implement E2 Policy service in GREEN
A.2.3.2	RIC Event Trigger Definition IE contents
RIC Event Trigger Definition IE contains E2SM-RC Event Trigger Definition Format 2 IE, which, in turn, contains RAN Parameter lists for Associated E2 Node Info IE and Associated UE info IE.
In this example:
1)	Associated E2 Node Info IE is not used
2) Associated UE Info IE, using RAN Parameters from clause 8.1.3, is used where the set of target UEs for the event is defined by a given slice (SST=sst1, SD=sd1) and group (IRFSP=irfsp1)
Additional sets of target UEs may be supported using the same RAN Parameter list with different target values for SST, SD and IRFSP.  These would be combined within the Event Trigger UE Information IE using the optional "Logical OR" flag (see clause 9.3.26).
RAN Parameter Testing for UE Group (defined in 8.1.3), used to populate the Associated UE Info IE, are as follows:
A.2.3.3	RIC Action Definition IE contents
E2SM-RC Action Definition Format 2 IE contains RAN Parameter lists for Policy Condition Definition IE and Policy Action IE.
In this example the Policy Condition Definition IE is used to define the set of target UEs that are to be assigned a given Policy Action IE based on a given Serving Cell (nr-cgi1) and membership of a given Explicit UE List (HOList1).  The corresponding Policy Action IE is used to set the measurement threshold offset for A3 RSRP measurement threshold (A3-rsrp-off1)
Different values of NR-CGI and/or Explicit UE List ID may be used in each Policy condition in the Policy Action IE, each with a corresponding different Policy Action definition.
RAN Parameters for Connected Mode Mobility Control (defined in clauses 8.5.4 and 8.1.3), used to populate the Policy Condition Definition IE, are as follows:
RAN Parameters for Handover Control (defined in clause 8.5.4.1), used to populate the Policy Action IE, are as follows:
Revision History
History