O-RAN.WG11.TR.SMO-Security-Analysis.0-R004-v06.00
Technical Report
Copyright © 2025 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V. Register of Association, Bonn VR 11238, VAT ID DE321720189
The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this document in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material of this document for your personal use, or copy the material of this document for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.
O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V., Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany
O-RAN Work Group 11
(Security Work Group)
Study on Security for
Service Management and Orchestration
(SMO)
Contents
1	Scope	3
2	References	4
3	Definitions of terms, symbols, and abbreviations	5
3.1	Terms	5
3.2	Symbols	6
3.3	Abbreviations	6
4	SMO Assets	8
4.1	Architecture	8
4.2	Functions	12
4.3	Applications	12
4.4	Interfaces	12
4.5	Information	13
4.6	SMO Services (SMOS)	14
5	Threats	16
5.1	Threat Model	16
5.2	Threat Template	16
5.3	Potential Threats and Exploits	17
5.4	SMO Threats	17
6	Threat Analysis	19
6.1	General SMO Threats	19
6.2 	Threats at O2 interface	23
6.3 	Threats at External interfaces	25
6.4 	Threats Targeting SME	26
6.5 	Preliminary Threat Analysis for RAN-Core Data Sharing	27
7 Security Controls	28
8	Risk Assessment	30
8.1	General SMO Risks	30
8.2	Threats at O2 interface	31
8.3	Threats at External Interfaces	32
8.4 	Threats Targeting SME	33
9	Primary Security Issues	34
10	Recommendations	35
Annex change history	37
Scope
This technical report provides the threat model and risk assessment for the SMO.  The report identifies threats and risks and recommends potential security controls to protect against those threats through safeguards or mitigation.
The steps of the threat modelling process are as follows:
Identify assets: Identify the assets of the SMO that must be protected.
Identify threats: Identify the threats that could adversely impact the SMO and threats that can use the SMO to adversely impact other components of the O-RAN system.
Identify the attack surface and attack vectors: Identify the points in the SMO where an attacker could
gain entry to the SMO
gain entry to another O-RAN system through the SMO
exploit a vulnerability or misconfiguration
compromise the system or its data.
Measure risk: The extent to which confidentiality, integrity, or availability is threatened, based upon a risk-based analysis considering the impact level resulting from an attack and the likelihood of occurrence.
Recommend controls: The management, operational, and technical controls for an information system to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the SMO and its information.
This Technical Report makes the following considerations:
The attack surface of the SMO includes its interfaces, functions, and data.  Data-at-rest, Data-in-motion, and Data-in-use must be considered.
O-RAN Alliance WG1 is in the process of defining an architecture for a decoupled SMO.  This will influence the set of assets to be protected.
The O-RAN Alliance is pursuing a zero-trust architecture (ZTA) for its specifications based upon NIST SP 800-207 [i.8].  This will affect the risk scoring.
Security controls are recommended for specifications of the SMO.  The recommended controls provided in this report will be shared with the responsible O-RAN Alliance working group, such as WG1 and WG10, so that the appropriate specification relevant to the recommendation can be updated.
Some of the identified SMO assets may already be in scope for separate ongoing WG11 security work items.  The SMO security Technical Report work item may inform those work items.
References
The following documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of the present document.
[i.1] O-RAN ALLIANCE PD: "O-RAN Document Drafting Rules (ODR)".
[i.2] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Architecture Description (OAD)".
[i.3] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Non-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller".
[i.4] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Protocols Specifications".
[i.5] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Requirements and Controls Specifications".
[i.6] O-RAN ALLIANCE TR: "O-RAN Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment".
[i.7] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Test Specifications".
[i.8] Zero Trust Architecture, NIST SP 800-207, NIST, August 2020, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-207/final.
[i.9] US National Security Agency (NSA) / Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), Security Guidance for 5G Cloud Infrastructures, Part I, Oct 28, 2021, Part II, Nov 18, 2021, Part III, Dec 2, 2021, Part IV, Dec 16, 2021.  https://www.nsa.gov/Press-Room/Cybersecurity-Advisories-Guidance/smdpage11747/2/ (as of Feb 28, 2022).
[i.10] Not used.
[i.11] Not used.
[i.12] OWASP Top 10 Web Application Security Risks, 2021, https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/.
[i.13] Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), Top Threats to Cloud Computing: Egregious Eleven, 2019, https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/artifacts/top-threats-to-cloud-computing-egregious-eleven.
[i.14] Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), Top Threats to Cloud Computing: Pandemic Eleven, 2022, https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/artifacts/top-threats-to-cloud-computing-pandemic-eleven.
[i.15] OWASP Top 10 Proactive Controls, 2021, https://owasp.org/projects/spotlight/historical/2021.02.10/
[i.16] Center for Internet Security (CIS) Critical Security Controls, https://www.cisecurity.org/controls/cis-controls-list
[i.17] Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) Cloud Control Matrix (CCM), https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/cloud-controls-matrix/
[i.18] ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Information Security Management System (ISMS).
[i.19] NIST SP 800-53r5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations, 2020.
[i.20] O-RAN ALLIANCE TR:  Study on Security for Non-RT-RIC, O-RAN.SFG.Non-RT-RIC-Security-TR-v01.00
[i.21] O-RAN ALLIANCE TR: Decoupled SMO Architecture, O-RAN.WG1.Decoupled-SMO-Architecture-R004-v02.00.01
[i.22] 3GPP TR 21.905: "Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications", Release 18.
Definitions of terms, symbols, and abbreviations
Terms
This document uses the verbal forms for the expression of provisions as defined in O-RAN Document Drafting Rules (ODR) [i.1]
This document uses the term Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) as defined by US NIST in [i.8] and applied to 5G cloud deployments by US CISA in [i.9].
A ZTA provides protection from external and internal threats, assuming the following:
there is no implicit trust granted to an asset based upon ownership, physical location, or network location [i.8]
the adversary is already inside the network. Perimeter defenses are no longer sufficient to secure a network, and there should always be an assumption that a threat actor has established a foothold in the network [i.9]
This document uses the term “attack surface” defined by US NIST as
The set of points on the boundary of a system, a system element, or an environment where an attacker can try to enter, cause an effect on, or extract data from, that system, system element, or environment [https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/attack_surface]
This document refers to “sensitive information” defined by US NIST as
information whose loss, misuse, or unauthorized access or modification could adversely affect security [https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/sensitive]
For the purposes of the present document, the terms and definitions provided in [i.2] apply:
A1 Interface: Interface between Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC to enable policy-driven guidance of Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.
External Interface: The interface between the SMO and an External System.
External System: A digital entity outside the O-RAN domain that is a consumer or producer for SMO Services.
Near-RT RIC: O-RAN Near-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller: A logical function that enables near-real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources via fine-grained data collection and actions over E2 interface. It may include AI/ML (Artificial Intelligence / Machine Learning) workflow including model training, inference and updates.
Non-RT RIC: O-RAN Non-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller: A logical function within SMO that drives the content carried across the A1 interface.  It is comprised of the Non-RT RIC Framework and the Non-RT RIC Applications (rApps) whose functions are defined below.
Non-RT RIC Applications (rApps): Modular applications that leverage the functionality exposed via the Non-RT RIC Framework’s R1 interface to provide added value services relative to RAN operation, such as driving the A1 interface, recommending values and actions that may be subsequently applied over the O1/O2 interface and generating “enrichment information” for the use of other rApps.  The rApp functionality within the Non-RT RIC enables non-real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources and policy-based guidance to the applications/features in Near-RT RIC.
Non-RT RIC Framework: That functionality internal to the SMO that logically terminates the A1 interface to the Near-RT RIC and exposes to rApps, via its R1 interface, the set of internal SMO services needed for their runtime processing.  The Non-RT RIC Framework functionality within the Non-RT RIC provides AI/ML workflow including model training, inference and updates needed for rApps.
R1 Interface: Interface between rApps and Non-RT RIC Framework via which R1 Services can be produced and consumed.
R1 Services: A collection of services including, but not limited to, service registration and discovery services, authentication and authorization services, AI/ML workflow services, and A1, O1 and O2 related services.
Service Management and Exposure (SME): A SMOS which enables services applicable to any entities within the SMO that fulfil the roles of SMO Service Producer and/or SMO Service Consumer.
Service Management and Orchestration (SMO): The O-RAN Service Management and Orchestration system as specified in the O-RAN Architecture Description (OAD) document [i.2], Clause 5.3.1.
Service Management and Orchestration Function (SMOF): Internal SMO entities which provide one or more SMO Services.
Service Management and Orchestration Service (SMOS): Set of management, orchestration and automation capabilities offered by a SMO Function.
SMOS Communication: Communication support between SMOS Producers and SMOS Consumers.
Symbols
None
Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given in 3GPP TR 21.905 [i.22] and the following apply:
ABAC 	Attribute Based Access Control
AI	Artificial Intelligence
CM	Configuration Management
DAR	Data at Rest
DIM	Data in Motion
DIU	Data in Use
DME	Data Management and Exposure
EI	Enrichment Information
eNB	eNodeB (applies to LTE)
FM	Fault Management
FOCOM	Federated O-Cloud Orchestration and Management
FTP	File Transfer Protocol
FTPS	File Transfer Protocol Secure
gNB	gNodeB (applies to NR)
HTTP	Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS	Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
JSON	JavaScript Object Notation
KPI	Key Performance Indicator
KQI	Key Quality Indicator
ML	Machine Learning
MNO	Mobile Network Operator
NF	Network Function
NFO	Network Function Orchestrator
OWASP	Open Worldwide Application Security Project
PBAC 	Policy Based Access Control
PII	Personally Identifiable Information
PKI	Public Key Infrastructure
PM	Performance Management
PTP	Precision Timing Protocol
RBAC	Role-based Access Control
REST	Representational State Transfer
RIC	RAN Intelligent Controller
RT	Real-Time
SBA	Service-Based Architecture
SME	Service Management and Exposure
SMO	Service Management and Orchestration
SMOF	SMO Functions
SMOS	SMO Services
SSH	Secure Shell
TBAC		Task Based Access Control
TCP	Transmission Control Protocol
TE&IE	Topology Exposure and Inventory Management
TLS	Transport Layer Security
ZTA	Zero Trust Architecture
SMO Assets
Architecture
There are security risks with the SMO due to its internal functions and internal and external interfaces. Securing the SMO is imperative because it is responsible for all service management and orchestration. A security vulnerability within the SMO could be exploited to serve as an entry point for attacks against O-RAN components and lateral movement across O-RAN.
Figure 4.1-1 and Figure 4.1-2 show the service-based architectural view of the SMO including internal and external interfaces and the Non-RT-RIC.  The Attack Surface of the SMO includes Functions, Applications, Interfaces, and Information, which each have assets that should be protected. Figure 4.1-3 is the SMO security architecture, based upon Figures 4.1-1 and 4.1-2.  Figure 4.1-4 shows the evolution of the SMO to a Service-Based Architecture. and Figure 4.1-5 is the Decoupled SMO security architecture with support for RAN-Core Data Sharing.  The following SMO assets need to be protected:
SMO Framework
SMO Functions (SMOF)
Non-RT RIC
SMO Services (SMOS)
Service Management and Exposure (SME)
Data Management and Exposure (DME)
Topology Exposure and Inventory Management (TE&IM)
rApp Management
R1 Services
Network Function Orchestrator (NFO)
Federated O-Cloud Orchestration and Management (FOCOM)
RAN NF Fault Management (FM)
RAN NF Configuration Management (CM)
RAN NF Performance Management (PM)
A1 Enrichment Information Management
A1 Policy Management
SW Package Onboarding
Service Orchestration
Service Assurance
RAN Analytics
AI/ML Workflow
SMOS Communication
O1, O2, R1 and A1 interfaces
Open Fronthaul M-Plane
External interfaces
User Management interfaces
PKI
Logging
Data
AI/ML models, algorithms, and methods
Figure 4.1-1. High-Level Architecture of O-RAN [i.2]
Figure 4.1-2 shows the Non-RT RIC architectural view with its SMO integration.
Figure 4.1-2. Non-RT-RIC Reference Architecture [i.3]
Figure 4.1-3. SMO Security Architecture
Figure 4.1-4. Decoupled SMO with SBA [i.21]
Figure 4.1-5. Decoupled SMO Security Architecture
Functions
The following SMO functions should be considered in a risk analysis:
ASSET-C-01: SMO Framework
ASSET-C-11: Non-RT RIC
ASSET-C-18: SMO Functions
Non-RT Functions, including:
ASSET-C-12: AI/ML Functions
ASSET-C-20: A1 Functions
Applications
The following SMO applications should be considered in a risk analysis:
ASSET-C-10: rApps
Interfaces
The following SMO interfaces should be considered in a risk analysis:
ASSET-C-14: A1
ASSET-C-16: R1
ASSET-C-26: External Interfaces
ASSET-C-22: O1
ASSET-C-23: O2
ASSET-C-24: OFH M-Plane
ASSET-C-62: SMOS Communication
Information
The following SMO information and data should be considered in a risk analysis:
O1 Data
ASSET-D-03: O1 Critical management plane data
ASSET-D-09: O1 informational data
O2 Data
ASSET-D-12: O2-IMS and O2-DMS data
ASSET-D-13: O2 Telemetry data
ASSET-D-14: O2 cloud provisioning data
Secret Stores
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-20: Administrator credentials (passwords and tokens)
AI/ML Data
ASSET-D-25: Training or test data: data sets collected externally or internally from the Near-RT RIC, O-CU and O-DU and passed to the ML training hosts in a ML system.
ASSET-D-26: The trained ML model which includes intellectual property, numerous configured hyperparameters and millions of learned parameters.
ASSET-D-27: The ML prediction results built into the model (e.g. expected outcomes)
ASSET-D-28: The behavior of the ML system including tasks for data collection, data wrangling, pipeline management, model retraining, and model deployment.
PII
ASSET-D-30: O-RAN specific UE IDs
Event logs
ASSET-D-29: Security event log files generated by O-RAN components
SMO Services (SMOS)
The following SMO Services should be considered in a risk analysis:
ASSET-C-44: Service Management and Exposure (SME)
ASSET-C-45: Data Management and Exposure (DME)
ASSET-C-46: Topology Exposure and Inventory Management (TE&IM)
ASSET-C-47: rApp Management
ASSET-C-48: R1 Services
ASSET-C-49: Network Function Orchestrator (NFO)
ASSET-C-50: Federated O-Cloud Orchestration and Management (FOCOM)
ASSET-C-51: RAN NF Fault Management (FM)
ASSET-C-52: RAN NF Configuration Management (CM)
ASSET-C-53: RAN NF Performance Management (PM)
ASSET-C-54: A1 Enrichment Information Management
ASSET-C-55: A1 Policy Management
ASSET-C-57: SW Package Onboarding
ASSET-C-58: Service Orchestration
ASSET-C-59: Service Assurance
ASSET-C-60: RAN Analytics
ASSET-C-61: AI/ML Workflow
Threats
Threat Model
For identifying threats, we are using STRIDE:
S - Spoofing identity. A user, application or program can masquerade as another to gain advantages not typically allowed for that user, application, or program.
T - Tampering with data. This involves the malicious modification of data, including making unauthorized changes to a database and alteration of data as it flows between computers.
R - Repudiation. A user or program refuses the authenticity of a good or reasonable command or action.
I - Information disclosure. This involves the exposure of information to individuals with unauthorized access to it. For example, users gain the ability to read a file that they normally would not have been granted access to, or an intruder can read data in transit between computers.
D - Denial of service. These attacks deny service to valid users, such as making a website unavailable or unusable by flooding it with illegitimate requests to keep legitimate users without access.
E - Elevation of privileges. An unauthorized user gains privileged rights to access previously no granted to compromise or destroy the system, such as a change in membership.
Threat Template
Template to present the threat characteristics:
Potential Threats and Exploits
A threat analysis is facilitated by an understanding of potential threats, as identified by the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) and the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP).
The OWASP Top 10 Web Application Security Risks [i.12] was updated in 2021 to include the following:
A01:2021 Broken Access Control
A02:2021 Cryptographic Failure
A03:2021 Injection (including Cross-Site Scripting)
A04:2021 Insecure Design
A05:2021 Security Misconfiguration
A06:2021 Vulnerable and Outdated Components
A07:2021 Identification and Authentication Failures
A08:2021 Software and Data Integrity Failures (including Insecure Deserialization)
A09:2021 Security Logging and Monitoring Failures
A10:2021 Server-Side Request Forgery
The CSA Top Threats to Cloud in 2019 was labelled the “Egregious Eleven” [i.13], as listed below:
Data Breaches
Misconfiguration and Inadequate Change Control
Lack of Cloud Security Architecture and Strategy
Insufficient Identity, Credential, Access, and Key Management
Account Hijacking
Insider Threat
Insecure Interfaces and APIs
Weak Control plane
Metastructure and Applistructure Failures
Limited Cloud Usage Visibility
Abuse and Nefarious Uses of Cloud Services
The CSA updated its list of top threats to cloud in 2022 and renamed it the “Pandemic Eleven” [i.14], as listed below:
1. Insufficient Identity, Credential, Access and Key Management, Privileged Accounts
2. Insecure Interfaces and APIs
3. Misconfiguration and Inadequate Change Control
4. Lack of Cloud Security Architecture and Strategy
5. Insecure Software Development
6. Unsecure Third-Party Resources
7. System Vulnerabilities
8. Accidental Cloud Data Disclosure
9. Misconfiguration and Exploitation of Serverless and Container Workloads
10. Organized Crime, Hackers & APT
11. Cloud Storage Data Exfiltration
SMO Threats
The threats listed in clause 5.3 relevant to O-RAN and SMO are considered in the SMO threat analysis.  The following threats to SMO have been identified and are analyzed in clause 6 – Threat Analysis.
Table 3.4 – SMO Threats
Threat Analysis
SMO threats are identified in the tables below. External and internal threats are from the perspective of the SMO.  External Threats are external to the SMO and Internal Threats are internal the SMO. This section provides threat analysis of four types of SMO threats:
General SMO Threats
Threats at O2 interface
Threats at External interfaces
Threats targeting SME
Additional SMO threats may be added for Decoupled SMO, RAN-Core Data Sharing, and Shared O-RU.
General SMO Threats
6.2 Threats at O2 interface
6.3 Threats at External interfaces
6.4 Threats Targeting SME
6.5 Preliminary Threat Analysis for RAN-Core Data Sharing
RAN-Core Data Sharing is a new SMO feature to provide data export from the SMO to the 5G Core (5GC).  5 possible architectural options are being considered:
Option 1: SMO/Non-RT RIC to 5GC Consumer with Facade of NWDAF
Option 2: SMO/Non-RT RIC to 5GC DCCF/MFAF with Facade of NWDAF
Option 3: SMO/Non-RT RIC to 5GC NWDAF with Facade of OA&M
Option 4: SMO/Non-RT RIC to 5GC NWDAF with Facade of RAN NF
Option 5: SMO/Non-RT RIC to 5GC NWDAF with MDAS through SME
WG11 performed a security analysis of the architectural options to provide recommendations for which should be considered for specification.  In summary, Option 1 is high security risk and should not be considered. Option 2, 3, 4, and 5 are lower risk and equivalent from a security perspective. However, those options have a major risk due to lack of certificate-based mutual authentication with NWDAF. Option 5, in addition, requires the 3GPP NWDAF add support for the O-RAN SME interface, which needs new 3GPP standardization.
7 Security Controls
Industry recommendations for strong security controls are provided from sources such as the OWASP Top 10 Proactive Controls [i.15], Center for Internet Security (CIS) Critical Security Controls [i.16], Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) Cloud Control Matrix (CCM) [i.17], ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Information Security Management System (ISMS) [i.18], NIST SP 800-53r5 Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations [i.19], and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) Security Guidance for 5G Cloud Infrastructures [i.9].
The OWASP Top 10 Proactive Controls are as follow:
C1: Define Security Requirements
C2: Leverage Security Frameworks and Libraries
C3: Secure Database Access
C4: Encode and Escape Data
C5: Validate All Inputs
C6: Implement Digital Identity
C7: Enforce Access Controls
C8: Protect Data Everywhere
C9: Implement Security Logging and Monitoring
C10: Handle All Errors and Exceptions
The CIS Critical Security Controls are as follow:
CIS Control 1: Inventory and Control of Enterprise Assets
CIS Control 2: Inventory and Control of Software Assets
CIS Control 3: Data Protection
CIS Control 4: Secure Configuration of Enterprise Assets and Software
CIS Control 5: Account Management
CIS Control 6: Access Control Management
CIS Control 7: Continuous Vulnerability Management
CIS Control 8: Audit Log Management
CIS Control 9: Email Web Browser and Protections
CIS Control 10: Malware Defenses
CIS Control 11: Data Recovery
CIS Control 12: Network Infrastructure Management
CIS Control 13: Network Monitoring and Defense
CIS Control 14: Security Awareness and Skills Training
CIS Control 15: Service Provider Management
CIS Control 16: Application Software Security
CIS Control 17: Incident Response Management
CIS Control 18: Penetration Testing
Relevant controls from the CSA CCM are 2. Application and Interface Security, 5. Cryptography, Encryption, and Key Management, 7. Data Security and Privacy Lifecycle Management, and 10. Identity and Access Management (IAM).
Relevant controls from ISO/IEC 27001:2013 are 5. Access Controls, 6. Cryptography, and 9. Communications Security.
Relevant controls from NIST SP 800-53r5 are 1. Access Controls, 16. Risk Assessment, 18. System and Communications Protection, and 19. System and Information Integrity.
Relevant controls from CISA’s Security Guidance are mTLS 1.2, or higher, with PKI and X.509 certificates, Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA), Principle of Least Privilege, Continuous Monitoring and Logging, and data confidentiality and protection as components of a zero trust architecture as defined in NIST SP 800-207 [i.8].
With consideration of these external sources, the following security controls should be evaluated for the SMO risk analysis:
Control-1: mTLS 1.2 or 1.3 with PKI and X.509 certificates
Control-2: OAuth 2.0
Control-3: IAM (using RBAC, ABAC, PBAC, TBAC)
Control-4: Principle of Least Privilege
Control-5: Certificate Management
Control-6: API Message Integrity Protection and Input Validation
Control-7: API Message Authentication
Control-8: Encryption for Data at Rest
Control-9: Encryption for Data in Motion
Control-10: Integrity Protection for Data at Rest
Control-11: Integrity Protection for Data in Motion
Control-12: Integrity Protection for Data in Use
Control-13: Digital Signatures
Control-14: Monitoring and Logging
Control-15: Alerting
Control-16: Rate-Limiting
Control-17: Configuration Validation
Control-18: Network Segmentation and Traffic Filtering
Risk Assessment
This section provides risk assessment tables for each of the identified assets.  These tables list the assets, threats, impacts, and possible security controls.
A malicious actor may be a nation-state adversary, cybercriminal, or employee.  In a ZTA, perimeter defenses alone are insufficient.  The SMO must be protected from untrusted external sources attempting to have access, while also assuming internal threat actors are inside the network with access to its functions and data.  Security controls for a ZTA, protecting against external and internal threats, should be implemented through a risk-based approach.  A risk analysis calculates risk levels by assessing the threat’s Likelihood of attack and the Impact from the attack.
Impact scores can be lowered with consideration of existing security controls.  Impact scoring is based upon current security controls.  Impact scoring does not consider security controls that may be potentially specified in the future.
Likelihood scores may be higher when the goal is a ZTA, because external and internal threats must be considered.  When likelihood scoring during a risk analysis, it is necessary to consider internal threats performing reconnaissance attacks impacting confidentiality and privacy and attacks causing damage or degrading performance impacting availability.  Internal threat actors are less likely to perform damaging attacks that are quickly and easily detected and blocked, but more likely to attempt reconnaissance attacks to collect information.  As a result, reconnaissance type attacks can be scored Likelihood = High while damaging/availability attacks can be scored Likelihood = Medium or Low.
External and internal threats are from the perspective of the SMO.  External Threats are external to the SMO and Internal Threats are internal to the SMO. An External Threat may be external to the SMO but internal to the O-RAN architecture.
A risk analysis of SMO threats is provided in the tables below covering general SMO risks, risks to the O2 interface, and risks to External interfaces.
Threats and risks to the A1 and R1 interfaces are assessed in a separate Technical Report, Study on Security for Non-RT-RIC [i.20].
Additional SMO threats may be added for Decoupled SMO and Shared O-RU.
General SMO Risks
Table 8-1. SMO Risk Analysis
Threats at O2 interface
Table 8-2. SMO Risk Analysis for Internal Threats at O2 Interface
Threats at External Interfaces
Table 8-3. SMO Risk Analysis for External Threats at External interfaces
8.4 Threats Targeting SME
Table 8-4. SMO Risk Analysis for Threats Targeting SME
Primary Security Issues
The following items were identified during the SMO Security Analysis phase 1 and were addressed in TR v1:
External interfaces to the SMO and Non-RT RIC have risks of exploitation from external threat actors.  The protocol and API used on an external interface is defined by the application or service and is not in-scope for the O-RAN Alliance.  WG11 analyzed the threats, risks, and potential security controls with the goal to provide general security requirements for any implementation of an External interface with the goal to protect O-RAN network functions and data.
The O2 interface is at risk of being exploited by an internal threat actor at the SMO or the O-Cloud.  This TR provides a security analysis of the O2 interface from the perspectives of the internal threat actor at the SMO and the O-Cloud, in addition to external threats.  The work item team will need to collaborate with the O-Cloud security work item team to ensure complete coverage of O2 threats and security controls.
The following items were identified as SMO security topics that require additional phases of the SMO Security Analysis to produce an update to the TR.
WG1 is considering a Decoupled SMO architecture based upon a Service-based Architecture (SBA) as used in the 5G Core.  This evolution of the SMO architecture would have security implications which WG1 should consider.  WG11 has performed a security analysis for Decoupled SMO.  WG11 should contribute security requirements as WG1 develops specifications for a Decoupled SMO.
The Decoupled SMO architecture will define a set of SMO Services called SMOS.  WG11 has performed a security analysis for SMOS. WG11 should contribute security requirements as WG1 develops specifications for SMOS.  Requirements can be general SMOS security requirements and SMOS-specific security requirements.
SMO service consumers and service producers may be SMOS and/or rApps. WG1 is considering to have the Service Management Exposure (SME) service act a security proxy for all SMO service consumers access service producers.  WG11 should perform a security analysis for the SME to be a security proxy.
WG11 has performed a security analysis for RAN-Core Data Sharing. WG11 should contribute security requirements as WG1 develops specifications for RAN-Core Data Sharing.
Recommendations
The Security Analysis presented in this technical report used the following process:
Asset identification -> 2. Threat identification -> 3. Threat analysis -> 4. Risk analysis -> 5. Recommend Security Controls
The SMO is a logical framework, not an implementation architecture, with external interfaces and internal functions and interfaces that are assets which should be protected with security controls.  The SMO may be implemented as a monolithic platform or multiple disaggregated functions, such as SMO functions and Non-RT-RIC functions, which should be protected assets.  Other SMO assets are the R1, A1, O1, O2, OFH M-Plane, and External interfaces and data at rest and in transit.
Recommendation 1: WG11 should update the Security Threat Modeling and Remediation Analysis document [i.6] to include the assets identified in this security analysis technical report.  A CR will be generated.
For the threat analysis, external and internal threats were considered from the perspective of the SMO.  Internal threats are internal the SMO and external threats are external to the SMO. External threats may be external to the SMO and internal to the O-RAN architecture.  More than 30 threats were identified, categorized as general SMO threats, O2 interface threats, and External interfaces threat.
Recommendation 2: WG11 should update the Security Threat Modeling and Remediation Analysis document [i.6] to include the threats and threat tables created in this security analysis technical report.  A CR will be generated.
Risk analysis of the identified threats included impact-likelihood scoring.  All 30+ of the identified threats were score either high-medium or high-high. External data sources are considered the greatest threat to the SMO due to the risk of an external threat actor poisoning external data that is imported into the SMO and the risk of an external threat actor exploiting an API on the external interface to gain access to the SMO or perform a remote code execution attack.
Likelihood scoring was influenced by the consideration of a zero trust architecture (ZTA), which is a publicly expressed goal of the O-RAN Alliance to consider external and internal threats.  ZTA is built on the foundational principles that perimeter defenses are insufficient to secure a network as internal external threats pose risk to a network.  There are two guidelines for designing a network and its network functions for a ZTA:
There is no implicit trust granted to an asset based upon ownership, physical location, or network location [i.8].
Assume the adversary is already inside the network [i.9].
The security controls recommended in this TR protect the SMO from confidentiality, integrity, and availability attacks from external and internal threats, consistent with a ZTA.
Recommendation 3: The SMO should have security controls implemented to protect its functions and interfaces from external and internal threats, consistent with a ZTA. Specific requirements will be formed as this work item continues.  A CR for the WG11 Security Requirements Specifications is planned for the March release train.
Consistent with a ZTA, the SMO should be secure by design in which its security posture does not assume that the SMO internal functions and interfaces are secure.
Recommendation 4: WG11 should collaborate with WG1 to ensure the WG11 security specifications are referenced by WG1 in its SMO specifications.  This process will build-in security to the evolving specifications for the SMO and Decoupled SMO.
The SMO architecture is continuing to evolve to support Decoupled SMO and direct communication between internal SMO functions and applications.  In addition, the security analysis will also need to consider Transport Node (TN) Termination, as specified in WG9, and Cooperative Transport Interface (CTI), as specified in WG4.
Recommendation 5: This SMO Security work item continues its security analysis to produce a TR v2 for the March release train, addressing Decoupled SMO, TN, and CTI.
The SMO role in certificate management is currently unspecified.
Recommendation 6: The WG11 Certificate Management work item team should investigate a potential role, if any, for the SMO in certificate management.
Annex change history