O-RAN.WG11.Threat-Model.O-R003-v05.00.01
Technical Specification
O-RAN Working Group 11 (Security Working Group)
O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Remediation Analysis
Copyright © 202 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.
The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this specification in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material of this specification for your personal use, or copy the material of this specification for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.
O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V., Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany
Register of Associations, Bonn VR 11238, VAT ID DE321720189
Contents
List of Tables
Table 3-1 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Assets and Threats	13
Table 3-2 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Security requirements	13
Table 4-1 : Roles and reponsibilities	15
Table 4-2 : Critical assets	20
Table 5-1 : O-RAN Threat Inventory	60
Table 6-1 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (1/2)	72
Table 6-2 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (2/2)	73
Table 7-1 : Severity rating	76
Table 7-2 : Risk Assessment	80
List of Figures
Figure 2-1 : Logical Architecture of O-RAN system [13]	12
Figure 5-1 : Threats and Vulnerabilities for O-RAN LLS 7-2x	31
Figure 5-2 : UE Identification in Near-RT-RIC	36
Figure 5-3 : Near-RT-RIC and xApps conflict with gNB	38
Figure 5-4 : A1 interface between the Non-RT RIC and the Near-RT RIC	43
Figure 5-5 : Illustration of the VM/Container escape attack	47
Figure 5-6 : Illustration of the migration flooding attack	48
Figure 5-7 : Illustration of the false resource advertising attack	48
Figure 5-8 : Illustration of the migration MITM attack	48
Figure 5-9 : Illustration of the Theft-of-Service/DoS Attack	49
Figure 5-10 : Illustration of the VM/Container hyperjacking attack	51
Figure 5-11 : Illustration of a cross VM/Container side channel attack	53
Figure 5-12 : REST Protocol Stack for the A1 and R1 Interfaces	58
Figure 7-1 : Main concepts of risk assessment	74
Foreword
This Technical Specification (TS) has been produced by O-RAN Alliance.
Modal verbs terminology
In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the O-RAN Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).
"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in O-RAN deliverables except when used in direct citation.
Introductory Material
1.1	Scope
The contents of the present document are subject to continuing work within O-RAN and may change following formal O-RAN approval. Should the O-RAN Alliance modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by O-RAN with an identifying change of version date and an increase in version number as follows:
version xx.yy.zz
where:
xx:	the first digit-group is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc. (the initial approved document will have xx=01).  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
yy:	the second digit-group is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document. Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
zz:	the third digit-group included only in working versions of the document indicating incremental changes during the editing process. External versions never include the third digit-group.  Always 2 digits with leading zero if needed.
1.2	References
1.2.1 Normative references
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, O-RAN cannot guarantee their long term validity.
The following referenced documents are necessary for the application of the present document.
3GPP TR 21.905: “Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications”
3GPP TS 33.511 V16.4.0 (2020-07): Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for the next generation Node B (gNodeB) network product class
3GPP TS 33.501: Security architecture and procedures for 5G system
3GPP TR 33.926: Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) threats and critical assets in 3GPP network product classes
3GPP TS 33.117: Catalogue of general security assurance requirements
ENISA threat landscape for 5g networks
‘A Survey on C-RAN Security’ Article in IEEE Access · June 2017, DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2717852
Intelligent O-RAN for Beyond 5G and 6G Wireless Networks
Solmaz Niknam, Abhishek Roy, Harpreet S. Dhillon, Sukhdeep Singh, Rahul Banerji, Jeffery H. Reed, Navrati Saxena, and Seungil Yoon
arXiv:2005.08374v1, Submitted on 17 May 2020
5G Americas | Security Considerations for the 5G Era July 2020
5G NR Jamming, Spoofing, and Sniffing: Threat Assessment and Mitigation
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.03845.pdf
5G NR Physical Layer Vulnerability- Jamming, Sniffing and Spoofing
http://www.techplayon.com/5g-nr-physical-channel-vulnerability-jamming-sniffing-and-spoofing/
ERICSSON ‘Security Considerations of Open RAN’ whitepaper and slides. https://www.ericsson.com/en/security/security-considerations-of-open-ran
ORAN.O-RANArchitectureDescription
ISO 27005 : https://www.iso.org/standard/75281.html
NIST Special Publication 800-154 2 Guide to Data-Centric System Threat Modeling
https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/sp/800-154/draft/documents/sp800_154_draft.pdf
Resource Allocation Scheme in 5G Network Slices
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324942931_Resource_Allocation_Scheme_in_5G_Network_Slices
3GPP TS 33.818: “Security Assurance Methodology (SECAM) and Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for 3GPP virtualized network products”.
NIST SP 800-190 - Application Container Security Guide
ENISA - Security aspects of virtualization
CSA - Best Practices for Mitigating Risks in Virtualized Environments
Fraunhofer AISEC - threat analysis of container-as-a-service for network function virtualization
Ecology-Based DoS Attack in Cognitive Radio Networks
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1603.01315.pdf
AN ARCHITECTURAL RISK ANALYSIS OF MACHINE LEARNING SYSTEMS: Toward More Secure Machine Learning
https://berryvilleiml.com/docs/ara.pdf
5G Americas Whitepaper October 2018 “The Evolution of Security in 5G”
https://www.5gamericas.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/5G_Americas_5G_Security_White_Paper_Final.pdf
3GPP TR 33.845 v16.1.0 (2020-09): Study on security aspects of the 5G Service Based Architecture (SBA)
OWASP API Security Top 10 2019, https://owasp.org/www-project-api-security
O-RAN ALLIANCE, “O-RAN.WG3.RICARCH-v02.01” (Near-RT RIC Architecture v2.1), November 2021
1.2.2 Informative references
References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
NOTE:	While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, O-RAN cannot guarantee their long term validity.
The following referenced documents are not necessary for the application of the present document but they assist the user with regard to a particular subject area.
1.3	Definitions, Abbreviations and Terms
1.3.1	Definitions
For the purposes of the present document, the terms and definitions given in 3GPP TR 21.905 and the following apply:
A1: Interface between non-RT RIC and Near-RT RIC to enable policy-driven guidance of Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.
A1 policy: Type of declarative policies expressed using formal statements that enable the non-RT RIC function in the SMO to guide the near-RT RIC function, and hence the RAN, towards better fulfilment of the RAN intent.
A1 Enrichment information: Information utilized by near-RT RIC that is collected or derived at SMO/non-RT RIC either from non-network data sources or from network functions themselves.
E2:  Interface connecting the Near-RT RIC and one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, and one or more O-DUs.
E2 Node: a logical node terminating E2 interface. In this version of the specification, O-RAN nodes terminating E2 interface are:
-	for NR access: O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, O-DU or any combination;
-	for E-UTRA access: O-eNB.
FCAPS: Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance, Security.
Intents: A declarative policy to steer or guide the behavior of RAN functions, allowing the RAN function to calculate the optimal result to achieve stated objective.
Near-RT RIC: O-RAN near-real-time RAN Intelligent Controller: a logical function that enables real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources via fine-grained data collection and actions over E2 interface.
Non-RT RIC: O-RAN non-real-time RAN Intelligent Controller: a logical function that enables non-real-time control and optimization of RAN elements and resources, AI/ML workflow including model training and updates, and policy-based guidance of applications/features in Near-RT RIC.
O-CU: O-RAN Central Unit: a logical node hosting O-CU-CP and O-CU-UP
O-CU-CP: O-RAN Central Unit – Control Plane: a logical node hosting the RRC and the control plane part of the PDCP protocol.
O-CU-UP: O-RAN Central Unit – User Plane: a logical node hosting the user plane part of the PDCP protocol and the SDAP protocol.
O-DU: O-RAN Distributed Unit: a logical node hosting RLC/MAC/High-PHY layers based on a lower layer functional split.
O-RU: O-RAN Radio Unit: a logical node hosting Low-PHY layer and RF processing based on a lower layer functional split.  This is similar to 3GPP’s “TRP” or “RRH” but more specific in including the Low-PHY layer (FFT/iFFT, PRACH extraction).
O1: Interface between management entities (NMS/EMS/MANO) and O-RAN managed elements, for operation and management, by which FCAPS management, Software management, File management shall be achieved.
RAN: Generally referred as Radio Access Network. In terms of this document, any component below Near-RT RIC per O-RAN architecture, including O-CU/O-DU/O-RU.
R1 Interface: Interface between rApps and Non-RT RIC framework via which R1 Services can be produced and consumed.
R1 Services: A collection of services including, but not limited to, service registration and discovery services, authentication and authorization services, AI/ML workflow services, and A1, O1 and O2 related services.
1.3.2	Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given in 3GPP TR 21.905 and the following apply:
AI/ML	Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning
eNB	eNodeB (applies to LTE)
gNB	gNodeB (applies to NR)
KPI	Key Performance Indicator
KQI	Key Quality Indicator
MIMO	Multiple Input, Multiple Output
PRB	Physical Resource Block
QoE	Quality of Experience
RIC	O-RAN RAN Intelligent Controller
SINR	Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio
UAV	Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
V2X	Vehicle to Everything
SMO	Service Management and Orchestration
MNO	Mobile Network Operator
SDN	Software Defined Network
RBAC	Role-based Access Control
LBT	Listen Before Talk
NF	Network Function
NFV	Network Function Virtualisation
PDCP	Packet Data Convergence Protocol
VM 	Virtual machine
VNF	Virtualised Network Function
LLS	Lower Layer Split
NETCONF	Network Configuration Protocol
SSH	Secure Shell
IPSEC	Internet Protocol Security
TLS	Transport Layer Security
PTP	Precision Timing Protocol
FTP	File Transfer Protocol
FTPS	File Transfer Protocol Secure
FH		Front haul
L1		Layer 1
O-DU		O-RAN Distributed Unit
O-RU		O-RAN Radio Unit
RU		Radio Unit
MITM		Man In The Middle
DoS		Denial of Service
GM		Grand Master
T-TC		Transparent Clock
TC		Transparent Clock
DL		Down Link
UL		Up Link
LAA		Licensed-Assisted Access
NR-U		New Radio Unlicensed
Overview
2.1	Objective and structure
O-RAN architecture [13] is quite different from the architecture of 3GPP RAN, where new components, interfaces and technologies are proposed, new actors (stakeholders) arise and novel business models are made possible. The attack surface is bigger and we foresee that O-RAN design and deployment will raise numerous security challenges and resulting risks because of the new O-RAN specific interfaces and components, the virtualization/containerization techniques, the support of open source code, the capability to support an AI/ML model, etc.
Therefore, the security analysis and the threat model for O-RAN must be carefully studied and relevant assets/stakeholders/vulnerabilities/threats/requirements/countermeasures/recommendations must be identified to reduce risk exposure and mitigate any harmful effects expected.
The material presented in this analysis aims at supporting various O-RAN stakeholders understanding the relevant threats resulting to an exposure of O-RAN assets by exploiting the vulnerabilities.
The objective is to give a comprehensive and high-level view on how security is organized in O-RAN system. In this document, we assume that 3GPP security requirements are met. Unless explicitly stated, features relate to O-RAN specifications.
This analysis is consolidated from various relevant sources, including main 5G standardization documents and telecommunication best practices (e.g. 3GPP, ETSI, NIST, ENISA and GSMA).
The first main part outlines the main stockholder roles involved in managing and using O-RAN system. Further, it addresses the prerequisites and assumptions needed to securely implement and run O-RAN systems. It also identifies the list of critical assets to be protected in integrity, availability, confidentiality, replay and authenticity.
The second main part addresses the threat model. It identifies the threat agents, determines the threat surface, identifies vulnerabilities, and lists the threats for each O-RAN component or interface. For each threat, the description, threatened asset(s), vulnerabilities, threat agents and affected components are given.
The third main part describes the security principles to be achieved to counter the identified threats. In addition, it illustrates the coverage between threats and security principles.
The fourth main part is the risk assessment of the identified threats in terms of severity and likelihood.
Note that this document focuses only on the components, interfaces and protocols specified by O-RAN alliance. Components, interfaces and protocols specified by 3GPP are only referenced where needed but are not within the scope of this specific O-RAN security analysis.
The current document is a working document with the need to update the content on a regular basis following the risk evaluation.
Note: In this document, the term NF (Network Function) is used to designate either VNF (Virtual Network Function), CNF (Containerized or cloud-native Network Function) or PNF (Physical Network Function).
Note: Terms “Containers” and “Virtual Machines” are used interchangeably in this document as the implementation of O-RAN SW components could either be container-based, VM-based or hybrid (Containers and VMs together).
2.2	Methodology
The methodology adopted in this document is based on the standard ISO 27005 [14] which provide a detailed and flexible structure to release a risk assessment.
Refer to NIST SP 800-154 [15] for the definition of Attack, Attack Surface, Attack Vector, Controls, Risk, Risk Mitigation, Threat, and Vulnerability.
The methodology followed in this document comprises three stages:
Identification (scope of this version of the document)
Identify stakeholders: First, we need to identify the stakeholders involved in the implementation, management, operation and maintenance of the O-RAN system. Roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder are given.
Define assumptions: The list of minimum prerequisites and assumptions need to be defined for the operational environment (not under the control of the O-RAN system) required to successfully operate the O-RAN system.
Identify assets: First, we need to locate relevant assets the O-RAN system hold and give details about the type (Data, component, etc.), the security properties (CIA) at rest and in transit and location.
Identify threats: We need to identify the relevant threats associated with the new O-RAN components, interfaces and technologies. In addition, the threat surface and agents are given.
Identify vulnerabilities: O-RAN system may have weaknesses in its new O-RAN components, interfaces and technologies which need to be identified.
Define security principles: We need to define security principles to be achieved in order to reduce risk exposure.
Elaborate and refine security principles: Each security principle needs to be detailed and refined into requirements, recommendations and countermeasures.
Identify existing/ongoing countermeasures: We need to identify all of O-RAN existing/ongoing controls and to take into account the protection provided by these controls before applying any new ones.
Risk assessment
After the identification stage, we need to focus efforts on the biggest threats, so we should use the information you’ve gathered during the identification stage to prioritize the biggest risks. There are many ways to do this, but the most common approach involves the following equation:
Risk = (the probability of a threat exploiting a vulnerability) x (total impact of the vulnerability being exploited)
Risk treatment (will be provided in a future version)
Now that we know the level of risk that each threat poses, we need to decide how we’ll treat them. There are four options:
Modify the risk by implementing a control to reduce the likelihood of it occurring.
Avoid the risk by ceasing any activity that creates it. This response is appropriate if the risk is too big to manage with a security control.
Share the risk with a third party. There are two ways we can do this: by outsourcing the security efforts to another organization or by purchasing cyber insurance to ensure we have the funds to respond appropriately in the event of a disaster. Neither option is ideal, because we are ultimately responsible for our organization’s security, but they might be the best solutions if we lack the resources to tackle the risk.
Retain the risk. This means that our organization accepts the risk and believes that the cost of treating it is greater than the damage that it would cause.
2.3	Perimeter
This chapter comprises the architecture in the scope of the security analysis. The architecture includes the list of O-RAN components, interfaces and protocols manipulating critical assets and implementing security functions.
In the second part, components which are out of scope are given.
2.3.1	Scope regarding architecture
As specified in [13], the logical architecture of O-RAN includes the following components, interfaces and protocols:
O-RAN components:
Network functions and applications
Service Management and Orchestration (SMO)
Non-RT RIC and rApps
Near-RT RIC and xApps
O-CU-CP/UP
O-DU
O-RU
O-eNB
Cloud computing platform
O-Cloud comprising a collection of physical infrastructure nodes that meet O-RAN requirements to host the relevant O-RAN functions (such as Near-RT RIC, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP, and O-DU), the supporting software components (such as Operating System, Virtual Machine Monitor, Container Runtime, etc.) and the appropriate management and orchestration functions.
Maintained interfaces by O-RAN:
A1 Interface between   Non-RT   RIC   and   Near-RT   RIC   to   enable   policy-driven   guidance   of   Near-RT RIC applications/functions, and support AI/ML workflow.
O1 Interface connecting the SMO to the Near-RT RIC, one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, and one or more O-DUs.
O2 Interface between the SMO and the O-Cloud
E2 Interface connecting the Near-RT RIC and one or more O-CU-CPs, one or more O-CU-UPs, one or more O-DUs, and one or more O-eNBs.
Open Fronthaul CUS-Plane Interface between O-RU and O-DU
Open Fronthaul M-Plane Interface between O-RU and O-DU as well as between O-RU and SMO
Relevant Protocols used by O-RAN system for enforcing security:
TLS
Should be used to protect the traffic between the O-RAN system and other network elements. It establishes a secure channel and provides CIA (Confidentiality, Integrity, Authenticity) features.
Should be used in O1 interface for NETCONF over TLS and JSON/REST over TLS
Should be used in A1 interface
SSH
Should be used in O1 interface and Fronthaul M-Plane for NETCONF over SSH
IPSEC
Should be used to protect E2 traffic
FTP and FTPS
Should be used to protect file transfers over O1 and Fronthaul M-Plane interfaces
PTP (Precision Timing Protocol, IEEE 1588-2019)
Figure 2-1 : Logical Architecture of O-RAN system [13]
2.3.2	Components not considered
The following components are not in the perimeter of the O-RAN system defined by the alliance; therefore, they are considered out of scope of this study:
3GPP interfaces are already studied and maintained by 3GPP,
UE,
MEC,
Core,
Antennas.
Statement of compatibility with 3GPP
This chapter gives the statement of compatibility with 3GPP/SCAS security Assets, Threats and Requirements. The statement of compatibility shows that 3GPP Assets/Threats/Requirements are applicable and that there is no conflict affecting the security of O-RAN components.
3.1	Assets and Threats
Table 3-1 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Assets and Threats
In addition, O-RAN also needs to consider the assets/threats related to the additional specific O-RAN interfaces and components. As a result, sections §4.3 and §5.4 elaborates the O-RAN specific assets and threats respectively.
3.2	Security requirements
Table 3-2 : Statement of compatibility with 3GPP – Security requirements
In addition, O-RAN also needs to consider the security requirements related to the additional specific O-RAN interfaces and components. As a result, chapter §6 focus on the O-RAN security principles.
In future versions of the document, security requirements, recommendations and countermeasures will be derived from security principles.
Roles-Assumptions-Assets
4.1	Stakeholders roles and responsibilities
The main stakeholders managing and using the O-RAN system are the following:
Table 4-1 : Roles and reponsibilities
Note: The operation, administration and orchestration of the O-RAN system can be split across multiple companies or roles.
Note: Compared to a traditional cellular network, the O-RAN communication environment has such characteristics as highly scalable, open and heterogeneous. Many O-RAN usage scenarios are accomplished effectively through the cooperation among mobile operators, vendors, etc. Therefore, a trust management mechanism becomes crucially important to realize trustworthy collaboration among the O-RAN stakeholders.
4.2	Assumptions and prerequisites
This section contains the list of minimum prerequisites and assumptions for equipment, software vendors, users and the physical environment needed to implement and successfully operate the O-RAN system.
The operational environment of the O-RAN system must provide reliable timestamps for the generation of audit records, etc.
Administrators, integrators, operators and orchestrators must be trustworthy, and trained such that they are capable of securely managing the O-RAN system and following the instructions provided by O-RAN Alliance as well as the provided guidance by vendors and service providers.
Log files, secrets and credentials stored in external systems and related to O-RAN shall be protected. They shall be access controlled so only privileged users have access to those secrets/credentials.
4.3	Critical assets
The following table gives the list of critical assets to be protected within the O-RAN system. For each asset, the protection level is proposed.  The table only considers critical assets, components and interfaces introduced by O-RAN Alliance.
Table 4-2 : Critical assets
Threat model
As the industry evolves towards RAN virtualization, it is important that a risk-based approach is taken to adequately address O-RAN security risks. Building upon the foundation set forth by 3GPP, O-RAN is standardized by the O-RAN Alliance with new functions and open, interoperable interfaces. With any nascent technology, including O-RAN, security should be built upon security-by-design using a risk-based approach, with consideration of potential zero-day attacks.  The O-RAN architecture [13] has security risks beyond those in a 3GPP architecture due to its expanded threat surface from new functions, additional interfaces, and the Lower Layer Split (LLS).  The disaggregation of hardware and software, virtualization, and use of open source components also present security risks that must be addressed.
5.1	Threat surface
The O-RAN architecture [13] introduces new functions and interfaces. The introduction of additional interfaces and nodes, and the decoupling of hardware and software, expands the threat and attack surface of the network. Threat surfaces may be divided into 6 main groups:
Additional functions: SMO, Non-Real-Time RIC, Near-Real-Time RIC
Additional open interfaces: A1, E2, O1, O2, Open Fronthaul
Modified architecture: Lower Layer Split (LLS) 7-2x
Decoupling increases threat to Trust Chain
Containerization and Virtualization: Disaggregation of software and hardware
Exposure to public exploits may be increased due to use of Open Source Code
The following entry points are considered:
API between planes which facilitate the propagation of threats
Threats coming from inside the O-RAN system
Threats coming from outside the O-RAN system
5.2	Threat agent
Threat agents can be categorized as follows:
Cyber-criminals: Represents individuals who commits cybercrimes, where he/she makes use of the computer either as a tool or as a target or as both.
Insiders: Represents malicious attacks perpetrated on a network or computer system by a person with authorized system access.
Hacktivists: Represents actors that perform cyber-attacks to achieve political or social gains.
Cyber-terrorists: Represents actors that their sole aim of violence against clandestine agents and subnational groups through the compromise of O-RAN infrastructures.
Script kiddies: Represents actors that do not poses deep technical expertise or resources to perform sophisticated attacks.
Nation-State: actors aggressively target and gain persistent access to public and private sector networks to compromise, steal, change, or destroy information. They may be part of a state apparatus or receive direction, funding, or technical assistance from a nation-state.
5.3	Potential vulnerabilities
This document addresses the following potential security vulnerabilities that could be exploited through attacks against Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability:
O-RAN specific vulnerabilities
Unauthorized access to O-DU, O-CU-CP, O-CU-UP and RU to degrade RAN performance or execute broader network attack (Availability)
Unprotected synchronization and control plane traffic on Open Fronthaul Interface (Integrity and Availability)
Disable over-the-air ciphers for eavesdropping (Confidentiality)
Near-RT RIC conflicts with O-gNB (Availability)
x/rApps conflicts (Availability)
x/rApps access to network and subscriber data (Confidentiality)
Unprotected management interface (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability)
CP UL or DL messages can be injected for attack on UP (Availability)
General vulnerabilities
Decoupling of functions without hardware root of trust and software trust chain (Integrity)
Exposure to public exploits from use of Open Source code (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability)
Misconfiguration, poor isolation or insufficient access management in the O-Cloud platform (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability)
5.4	Threats
Threats can be grouped in seven categories:
Threats against O-RAN system
Threats against O-CLOUD
Threats to open source code
Physical Threats
Threats against 5G radio networks
Threats against ML system
Protocol stack threats
The threat analysis is carried out using a well-defined structure to present each threat cases and simplify the risk analysis associated with each threat. In the following subsections, only a unique ID, title and description of each threat are given:
At the end of this chapter a matrix is provided depicting the mapping between threats and the following elements:
The template of the matrix is as follows:
5.4.1	Threats against O-RAN system
5.4.1.1	Common among O-RAN components
The O-RAN system architecture introduces the following common threats among its components:
5.4.1.2	Threats against the fronthaul interface and M-S-C-U planes
The LLS architecture and the fronthaul interface introduce the following threats:
Figure 5-1 : Threats and Vulnerabilities for O-RAN LLS 7-2x
5.4.1.3	Threats against O-RU
The O-RU introduces the following threats:
5.4.1.4	Threats against Near-RT RIC
Near-Real-Time (RT) RIC introduces the following threats:
Figure 5-2 : UE Identification in Near-RT-RIC
5.4.1.5	Threats against Non-RT RIC
Threats against Non-RT RIC include:
5.4.1.6	Threats against xApps
xApps introduce the following threats:
Figure 5-3 : Near-RT-RIC and xApps conflict with gNB
5.4.1.7	Threats against rApps
Threats against rApps include:
5.4.1.8	Threats against PNF
As mentioned before in this document, the NFs could be either VNF, CNF or PNF. Vulnerabilities of a PNF could be used as a starting point for an attack against VNFs/CNFs.
5.4.1. Threats against R1 interface
The R1 interface facilitates inter-connection between rApps and Non-RT RIC framework supplied by different vendors, and provides a level of abstraction between rApps and Non-RT RIC framework/SMO that can be the consumers and or producers of R1 services.
5.4.1.1 Threats against A1 interface
The purpose of the A1 interface is to enable the Non-RT RIC function to provide policy-based guidance, ML model management and enrichment information to the Near-RT RIC function for RAN can optimization.  The Non-RT RIC can provide enrichment information over the A1 interface to support the policy enforcement in the Near-RT RIC.  The A1 interface is used for discovery, request and delivery of A1 Enrichment Information and discovery of External Enrichment Information.
Figure 5-4 : A1 interface between the Non-RT RIC and the Near-RT RIC
5.4.2	Threats against O-CLOUD
Due to O-RAN security and privacy concerns, a trust relationship must be built and maintained between the different actors involved in providing and managing the O-Cloud infrastructure. The role of trust is essential and vital to prevent or correct any potential issue that may arise from the following challenges:
SW decoupled from dedicated HW
Another organization may share the same HW
3-party organization may be managing the infrastructure
Use of open source components
Relevant threats against O-CLOUD described in this section are selected from the following existing studies on virtualization and containerization security:
3GPP TS 33.818 [17]: “Security Assurance Methodology (SECAM) and Security Assurance Specification (SCAS) for 3GPP virtualized network products”.
NIST SP 800-190 - Application Container Security Guide [18]
ENISA - Security aspects of virtualization [19]
CSA - Best Practices for Mitigating Risks in Virtualized Environments [20]
Fraunhofer AISEC - threat analysis of container-as-a-service for network function virtualization [21]
Five types of threats are considered:
Compromise of VNF/CNF images and embedded secrets
Weak orchestrator configurations, access controls and isolation
Misuse of a VM/CN to attack other VM/CN, hypervisor/container engine, other hosts (memory, network, storage), etc.
Spoofing and eavesdropping on network traffic to access all O-RAN network data processed in the workload
Compromise auxiliary/supporting network services
Other threats involving the O-Cloud including hypervisor/container engine and host hardware are not considered. For an exhaustive security analysis on the virtualization/containerization technologies, please refer to the above documentation, and others.
Virtualization and containerization technologies in O-RAN introduce the following relevant threats:
5.4.2.1	Generic Threats
5.4.2.2	Threats concerning VMs/Containers
Figure 5-5 : Illustration of the VM/Container escape attack
Figure 5-6 : Illustration of the migration flooding attack
Figure 5-7 : Illustration of the false resource advertising attack
Figure 5-8 : Illustration of the migration MITM attack
Figure 5-9 : Illustration of the Theft-of-Service/DoS Attack
5.4.2.3	Threats concerning VM/Container images
5.4.2.4	Threats concerning the virtualization layer (Host OS-Hypervisor/Container engine)
Figure 5-10 : Illustration of the VM/Container hyperjacking attack
5.4.2.5	Threats concerning O-Cloud interfaces
5.4.2.5.1	O2 interface
Two main interfaces are defined in O-RAN WG6 specification and identified as critical assets of O-Cloud, i.e. interfaces O2 between O-Cloud and SMO. The threats on these interfaces are as follows.
5.4.2.5.2	O-Cloud API
5.4.2.6	Threats concerning hardware resources
Figure 5-11 : Illustration of a cross VM/Container side channel attack
5.4.2.7	Threats concerning O-Cloud management (SMO, NFO, FOCOM)
5.4.3	Threats to open source code
Open source introduces the following threats:
5.4.4	Physical Threats
The use of hardware introduces the following threats:
5.4.5	Threats against 5G radio networks
Threats against 5G radio networks include:
5.4.6	Threats against ML system
This section provides the relevant threats against the ML system implemented in O-RAN architecture. The threats listed here below are generic to cover the ML model and not refined at ML components (training and inference hosts) due to the various deployment scenarios that are considered for ML architecture/framework in O-RAN. The deployment scenarios are:
Scenario 1.1: SMO/Non-RT RIC acts as both the ML training and inference host.
Scenario 1.2: Non-RT RIC acts as the ML training host and the Near-RT RIC as the ML inference host
Scenario 1.3: Non-RT RIC acts as the ML training host and the O-CU/O-DU as the ML inference host
The involved components and interfaces within each scenario are:
Scenario 1.1: SMO/Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU, O-DU, O-RU, SMO internal/O1/A1 interfaces
Scenario 1.2: SMO/Non-RT RIC, Near-RT RIC, O-CU, O-DU, O-RU, O1/O2/A1/E2 interfaces
Scenario 1.3: SMO/Non-RT RIC, O-CU, O-DU, O-RU, O1/O2 interfaces
For more information about ML security risks and controls, see the risk analysis of ML systems released by BIML [23].
5.4.7 Protocol Stack Threats
The A1 and R1 interfaces use the REST protocol stack shown in the figure below.  The transport network layer is built on IP transport. TCP provides the communication service at the transport layer.  HTTP is the application-level protocol used providing reliable transport of messages.  TLS provides secure HTTP connections for secure transport of messages.  The application layer protocol is based on a RESTful approach with transfer of JSON formatted policy statements. Each of these protocols has known vulnerabilities that can be exploited by a malicious actor.
Figure. REST Protocol Stack for the A1 and R1 Interfaces
Figure 5-12 : REST Protocol Stack for the A1 and R1 Interfaces
5.5	Coverage matrix of threats
From the above threats, a threat inventory for the O-RAN system is developed to provide a mapping between threats, vulnerabilities and assets. Threats have been grouped into two categories:
‘O-RAN specific’ comprises threats directly relating to O-RAN components and interfaces
‘General’ covers threats relating to physical, open source, virtualization, IoT and radio aspects
The threat inventory provides all details of each individual threat: Threat agents, vulnerabilities, threatened assets and affected components.
Table 5-1 : O-RAN Threat Inventory
Security principles
This chapter consists of a set of security principles that the O-RAN system should achieve. They provide high level and abstract statement of the intended solution to countering potential Threats.  In the future, this chapter is expected to be normative, therefore these security principles will be developed and refined into security requirements, recommendations and potential countermeasures in order to clearly identify what is required (SHALL), recommended (SHOULD) or optional (MAY). In the current version, only ‘SHOULD’ is used within the security principles to make recommendations.
6.1	Principles (SP)
6.1.1	SP-AUTH Mutual Authentication
Mutual authentication SHOULD be established to allow the O-RAN system verifying who performs what, thus possible to detect fake base stations, unauthorized or malicious components, malicious applications and malicious users/administrators. To authenticate each component, a unique identifier and one or more credentials that SHOULD be kept secret are needed.
6.1.2	SP-ACC Access Control
The O-RAN system SHOULD forbid unauthorized administrators or components to access O-RAN resources or services anytime and anywhere. Access controls are required for:
Network Access Controls for filtering unauthorized/unexpected traffic in the O-RAN components over their interfaces.
Access controls to restrict access to component configurations.
Access controls for hardware to maintain the trust chain.
6.1.3	SP-CRYPTO Secure cryptographic, key management and PKI
Well-known, standardized, secure and unbroken cryptographic schemes and protocols SHOULD be used. Proprietary schemes and protocols SHOULD be avoided.
A secure key management of O-RAN keys (KgNB, KRRC-enc, KRRC-int, KUP-int, and KUP-enc, ksn) SHOULD be implemented to manage all the steps of key lifecycle: key generation using an appropriate level of entropy from a reliable source, secure key storage, key rotation and revocation, secure key destruction, etc.
Reliable PKI for authentication and data encryption SHOULD be used. Public CAs SHOULD be supported. The certificates SHOULD be issued by a trusted or rooted Certificate Authority (CA). The CA implements the Certificate Policy which specifies the rules and policies about who may or may not receive a Certificate. Relying parties can access the Certificate Policy to determine what validation/verification checks were performed prior to certificate issuance.
Each O-RU SHOULD be configured with lists of algorithms which are allowed for usage. There SHOULD be one list for integrity algorithms, and one for ciphering algorithms. These lists SHOULD be ordered according to a priority decided by the operator.
6.1.4	SP-TCOMM Trusted Communication
Integrity, confidentiality, availability, authenticity and replay protection of resources SHOULD be ensured in transit (see ‘Critical Assets) over O-RAN interfaces according to industry best practices.
6.1.5	SP-SS Secure storage
Integrity, confidentiality, availability protection of resources SHOULD be ensured at rest (see ‘Critical Assets) according to industry best practices. Special attention SHOULD be paid to the protection of private keys, certificates and hash-values at rest.
6.1.6	SP-SB Secure boot and self-configuration
O-RAN components SHOULD secure their underlying firmware and configuration to provide the opportunity for trust to be extended higher in the software stack. Verified platform firmware can, in turn, verify the operating system (OS) boot loader, which can then verify other software components all the way up to the OS itself, the hypervisor or container runtime layers and O-RAN components. The transitive trust SHOULD be consistent with the concept of the chain of trust (CoT)-a method where each piece of code in the boot process measures and checks the signature of the next stage of the boot process before the software boots.
The secure boot process, signature verification and self-configuration SHOULD be securely and properly implemented for all O-RAN components to authenticate them before loading.
6.1.7	SP-UPDT Secure Update
A secure update management process SHOULD be implemented for introducing a new component or software change into the O-RAN system. The process SHOULD consider the ability to update the cryptographic algorithms and to adapt to upcoming O-RAN security challenges. O-RAN vendors SHOULD constantly provide ongoing security monitoring and patches for all of O-RAN components. A timely update cycles if vulnerabilities are discovered SHOULD be in place.
6.1.8	SP-RECO Recoverability & Backup
Recoverability process in terms of the capacity of recovery in case of denial of service SHOULD be implemented. An approach for detecting and mitigating DoS attacks SHOULD be in place.
O-RAN vendors SHOULD define a recovery plan that resets the O-RAN components to a trustworthy state in case of a malfunction or an attack (e.g. DoS).
Backup systems SHOULD be in place to allow data or component on the O-RAN to be secured. Backup systems SHOULD ensure a suitable level of data or component availability and reliability.
6.1.9	SP-OPNS Security management of risks in open source components
Vendors using open source code SHOULD enhance its security by applying industry coding best practices. It is recommended that vendors practice a higher level of due diligence for exposure to public exploits when using Open Source code.
A Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) SHOULD be maintained to understand which open source components are in use and where.
Security Analysis (Audit, vulnerability scan, etc.) SHOULD be performed to ensure all identified components are free of security vulnerabilities.
Because of the pull operation mode of the open source software, a proper policy and process SHOULD be in place for identifying and patching known issues with the open source components. Open source software components SHOULD be kept up to date and patched.
6.1.10	SP-ASSU Security Assurance
Mobile networks are classified as critical infrastructure making security assurance especially more than relevant:
Vendors SHOULD ensure and prove that its software or hardware meets 3GPP Security Assurance Specifications (SCAS).
Vendors SHOULD ensure and prove that its software or hardware fulfils O-RAN security tests, requirements and recommendations provided by O-RAN alliance.
Vendors SHOULD ensure and prove that their software or hardware meets the needs of many national and international cybersecurity regulations, such as the Cyber Act, GDPR, etc.
Vendors SHOULD provide risk assessment, secure code review, penetration testing, vulnerability analysis and hardening guidelines for their O-RAN components.
6.1.11	SP-PRV Privacy
In O-RAN, the privacy of end users SHOULD be considered. The privacy of end users can be divided into data privacy, identity privacy and personal information privacy. Most Communication services are to gather data and personal information around end users themselves, which may reveal information sensitive to their privacy. Adversaries would further extract more personal information about end users, such as UE priority, location information, trajectory, and preference.
6.1.12	SP-SLC Continuous security development, testing, logging, monitoring and vulnerability handling
Continuous development and continuous integration (CD/CI) with continuous regression testing and software security auditing SHOULD be implemented.
Relevant activities events SHOULD be logged and logs collected SHOULD be analyzed in real time for the identification of potential security attacks and for security auditing.
Continuous monitoring SHOULD be implemented to verify that the wanted security state is maintained throughout the lifecycle of deployed O-RAN components.
Vulnerability management SHOULD be in place with intelligence to continuously track, identify and remediate vulnerable applications. Vendors SHOULD keep track of any new vulnerabilities discovered and is ready to act on customer product security incidents and reported security issues affecting O-RAN components.
6.1.13	SP-ISO Robust Isolation
In a multi-vendor environment, intra-domain host isolation SHOULD be enforced. In the same host, VMs, CNs, virtualization/container layer, CPU, storage, and network security isolation of resources SHOULD be ensured by implementing system security orchestration, segmentation, lifecycle management, time scheduling, monitoring and audit on the management, signaling, control and data planes, and the execution of virtualized O-RAN components.
6.1.14	SP-PHY Physical security
The O-RAN system SHOULD be located at physically secure environment in a way that minimizes the risk of resource theft and destruction. It SHOULD support secure storage of sensitive data (cryptographic keys and configuration data), execution of sensitive functions (encryption/decryption, authentication), and execution of boot and update processes.
Special attention SHOULD be paid to the site intrusion and physical access threats against O-RU sites. Consequently O-RU equipment SHOULD disable all unnecessary physical and logical ports, protocols and interfaces. In addition, secure physical connections to O-RU for O&M operations SHOULD be implemented (e.g. secure laptop with secure credentials).
6.1.15	SP-CLD Secure cloud computing and virtualization
Defense methods SHOULD be implemented: virtual machine-based intrusion detection, virtual machine-based isolation, virtual machine-based kernel protection, virtual machine-based access control, and virtual machine-based trusted computing.
To get a fully trusted virtualized application, all the layers in the stack from hardware to firmware to virtualized software SHOULD be trust, as it is impossible to protect a virtual machine or containers from the host system.
6.1.17	SP-ROB Robustness
The O-RAN system SHOULD not only ensure the robustness of software or hardware resources, but also guarantee the robustness of the cognitive radio channel for meeting the QoS of communication services required by users. In some scenarios, the robustness of spectrum sensing SHOULD be enhanced when some sensing nodes (e.g. O-RU) are easily malfunctioned. Robustness is an essential consideration for overcoming the security threats caused by jamming, DoS or DDoS attacks.
6.2	Coverage Threats - Security principles
The table below illustrates how threats are covered by security principles. It outlines the list of security principles contributing to counter threats.
Table 6-1 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (1/2)
Table 6-2 : Coverage Security principles-Threats (2/2)
Risk assessment
After identifying the list of assets, threats and vulnerabilities, the next step is the risk assessment. The main concepts of risk assessment are illustrated in the following figure.
Figure 7-1 : Main concepts of risk assessment
The criticality of the identified threats in section 5.4 were assessed based on the severity (consequence) and the likelihood of occurrence. Indications of severity level for each threat are given whether they are considered as high, medium, or low. This severity is a global perception of the risk based on its impacts. In practice, it varies strongly depending on the use cases and deployment/configuration models of the O-RAN system.
Moreover, the type of loss (availability, integrity and/ or confidentiality) has been assessed for each threat.
7.1	Determination of severity level process
The process followed to determine the severity level resulting from threats that successfully exploit vulnerabilities is based on the following table which includes the definition in terms of Privacy, Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability of the three severity levels ‘Low’, ‘Medium’ and ‘High’ shown here as green, yellow and red.
This table defines what “low,” “medium” and “high” means.
The severity of an impact is expressed as follows:
Level of impact for various threats on the properties Privacy, Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability
Scale of impact, depending on the number of affected O-RUs and /or O-DUs.
Scale of impact depending on the Clock Model and Synchronization Topology configurations LLS-C1, LLS-C2, LLS-C3 and LLS-C4.
Adverse impacts depending on whether or not existing requirments and controls are already defined in the O-RAN requirments specifications.
Table 7-1 : Severity rating
Note:
the severity level depends on the number of affected RUs and O-DUs. The severity level is consequently 'Low' in case of one affected O-RU, 'Medium' in case of one affected O-DU with its related multiple O-RUs, and 'High' for multiple affected O-DUs-O-RUs. Operators conducting a full risk analysis according to this report should conduct a use case-based analysis by taking into account the likelihood and the real deployment of the O-RAN system.
Note:
Configuration LLS-C1
In LLS-C1, the network timing is distributed from O-DU to O-RU via direct connection between O-DU site and O-RU site. O-DU is acting as a master and directly synchronizes O-RU.
DoS attacks against the master clock: There are two scenarios:
1.     Scenario 1: One O-RU is served by O-DU, therefore only one O-RU is affected. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
2.     Scenario 2: Multiple O-RUs are served by O-DU, therefore all those O-RUs are affected as the connection between O-DU and O-RU is point-to-point. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
Configuration LLS-C2
In LLS-C2, the network timing is distributed from O-DU to O-RU between O-DU sites and O-RU sites. One or more Ethernet switches are allowed in the fronthaul network. O-DU acting as master to distribute network timing toward O-RU.
DoS attacks against the master clock within the O-DU may affect one or multiple O-RUs. In this configuration, a neighbor O-DU could act a backup and play the role of a master to distribute network timing to all the RUs belonging to the affected O-DU by reconfiguring the network of switches. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
Configuration LLS-C3
Frequency and time distribution is made by the fronthaul network itself (not by the O-DU). One or more PRTC/T-GM are implemented in the fronthaul network to distribute network timing toward O-DU and O-RU.
DoS attacks against the master clock within the fronthaul network may affect multiple O-DUs with their related O-RUs. Consequently, the severity level is ‘High’.
Configuration LLS-C4
Local PRTC timing that provides time synchronization to the O-RU (it could be embedded in the O-RU).
DoS attacks against the master clock may affect only one O-RU. Consequently, the severity level is ‘Low’.
According to what we described in the here above two notes, T-SPLANE-01 has been splitted in the table of the next section according to the Clock Model and Synchronization Topology configurations C1, C2, C3, and C4.
Note:
Adverse impacts: This factor depends on the existing normative O-RAN security requirements and controls. For example, the level is high in case no available O-RAN security requirements and controls in the O-RAN security specifications. In the risk assessment table in the column ‘Assumptions’, some of the agreed security requirements/controls by the O-RAN alliance have been stated for some threats as arguments for justifying the severity levels ‘Low’ or ‘Medium. This means that the severity level is estimated at Low’ or ‘Medium’, provided that the security controls are in place.
7.2	Determination of likelihood level process
The process followed to determine the likelihood level resulting from threats that successfully exploit vulnerabilities is based on the following table which includes the relevant factors that are considered. For each factor, three levels ‘Low’, ‘Medium’ and ‘High’ are shown in the following table as green, yellow and red.
The table below defines what “low,” “medium” and “high” means.
The likelihood level is expressed by four factors as follows:
Adverse impacts: This factor depends on the existing normative O-RAN security requirements and controls. For example, the level is high in case no available O-RAN security requirements and controls in the O-RAN security specifications. In the risk assessment table in the column ‘Assumptions’, some of the agreed security controls by the O-RAN alliance have been stated for some threats as arguments for justifying the likelihood levels ‘Low’ or ‘Medium. This means that the likelihood level is estimated at Low’ or ‘Medium’, provided that the security controls are in place.
Note: This factor is used to determine the likelihood level for the most categories of threats. It is also used as a relevant factor for severity for some categories of threats, in particular the O-Cloud threats category.
Threat event initiation: This factor takes into consideration the capabilities that attackers possess and the potential entry points to exploit a vulnerability and initiate an attack. For example, it is high if an attack can be initiated from internet or untrusted network.
Exposure: This factor is related to the number of external interfaces and/or services that are exposed to an attacker.
Zero Trust Approach: Likelihood scoring considers a zero trust architecture which protects against internal threat actors.  Likelihood scores are higher for a zero trust architecture (ZTA) because internal threats must be considered in addition to external threats. In a ZTA it cannot be assumed that perimeter defenses are sufficient.  As a result, scored Likelihood = Medium, at a minimum.   Reconnaissance type attacks can be scored Likelihood = High while damaging/availability attacks can be scored Likelihood = Medium.  The reason is that threat actors are less likely to perform damaging attacks that are quickly and easily detected. Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) typically move laterally in anonymous fashion to prevent detection while providing reconnaissance (see O-RAN.SFG.Non-RT-RIC-Security-TR-v01.00).
7.3 Evaluation of the risks process
Based on the results from the severity and likelihood assessment activities, the next step is the risk estimation activities.
The following risk assessment matrix is used to assess the risk score. The matrix takes two the two estimated qualitative inputs: (i) likelihood and (ii) the severity. One axis representing the probability of a risk scenario occurring and the other representing the damage it will cause (Severity). In the middle, you have scores based on their combined totals.
Using this formula RISK= Severity x Likelihood by a simple multiply the severity and likelihood scores to obtain the final risk score as shown in the table below.
For example, if the estimated likelihood of a threat is low and the corresponding severity is high, then the risk is medium.
7.4	Risk assessment output
The following table depicts the risk assessment output table which illustrates the different threats along with their impacts, the type of loss, the perceived severity/likelihood levels and the risk scoring.
Note: Risk assessment of threats for ML and ProtocolStack will be addressed during a next version of the report.
Table 7-2 : Risk Assessment
Revision History
History