O-RAN.WG11.SharedORU-Security-Analysis-TR.0-R003-v03.00
Technical Report
O-RAN Working Group 11 (WG11)
Study on Security
for Shared O-RU (SharedORU)
Copyright © 2023 by the O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.
The copying or incorporation into any other work of part or all of the material available in this document in any form without the prior written permission of O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V.  is prohibited, save that you may print or download extracts of the material of this document for your personal use, or copy the material of this document for the purpose of sending to individual third parties for their information provided that you acknowledge O-RAN ALLIANCE as the source of the material and that you inform the third party that these conditions apply to them and that they must comply with them.
O-RAN ALLIANCE e.V., Buschkauler Weg 27, 53347 Alfter, Germany
Contents
1	Scope	3
2	References	5
3	Definitions of terms, symbols and abbreviations	6
3.1	Terms	6
3.2	Symbols	6
3.3	Abbreviations	6
4	Shared O-RU Assets	8
4.1	Architecture	8
4.2	Functions	9
4.3	Interfaces	11
4.4	Information	11
5	Threats	13
5.1	Threat Model	13
5.2	Threat Template	13
5.3	Potential Threats and Exploits	14
5.4	Shared O-RU Threats	14
6	Threat Analysis	16
6.1	Lateral Movement Between Network Functions	18
6.2	User Access Threats	21
6.3	Data Access Threats	22
6.4	Availability Threats	24
6.5	Configuration Threats	26
6.6	Neutral Host Controller (NHC) Threats	28
7	Security Controls	31
8	Risk Assessment	33
8.1	Lateral Movement Between Network Functions	33
8.2	User Access Threats	34
8.3	Data Access Threats	35
8.4	Availability Threats	35
8.5	Configuration Threats	36
8.6	Neutral Host Controller Threats	37
9	Primary Security Issues	38
10	Recommendations	39
Annex A:	Shared O-RU All-in-One Architecture	40
History	42
Scope
This technical report provides the threat model and risk assessment for the Shared O-RU.  The report identifies threats and risks and recommends potential security controls to protect against those threats through safeguards or mitigation.
The steps of the threat modelling process are as follows:
Identify assets: Identify the assets of the Shared O-RU that must be protected.
Identify threats: Identify the threats that could adversely impact the Shared O-RU and threats that can use the Shared O-RU to adversely impact other components of the O-RAN system.
Identify the attack surface and attack vectors: Identify the points in the Shared O-RU where an attacker could
gain entry to a O-RU Host or O-RU Tenant (SRO) of a Shared O-RU
gain entry to another O-RAN component through the Shared O-RU
exploit a vulnerability or misconfiguration at the Shared O-RU
compromise the Shared O-RU to degrade performance or impact availability
expose data at rest / data in use at the Shared O-RU
expose data in motion between the Shared O-RU and other O-RAN network functions
Measure risk: The extent to which confidentiality, integrity, or availability is threatened, based upon a risk-based analysis considering the impact level resulting from an attack and the likelihood of occurrence.
Recommend controls: The management, operational, and technical controls for an information system to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the Shared O-RU and its information.
The sections in this Shared O-RU Security Analysis Technical Report (TR) follow the process described above.
This Technical Report makes the following considerations:
The attack surface of the Shared O-RU includes assets that are interfaces, functions, and data.
Data-at-rest, Data-in-motion, and Data-in-use must be considered.
O-RAN Alliance WG4 is in the process of defining optional architectures for Shared O-RU.  This will influence the set assets to be protected.
The O-RAN Alliance is pursuing a zero-trust architecture (ZTA) for its specifications based upon NIST SP 800-207 [8].  This will affect the risk scoring as external and internal threats are considered.
Security controls will be recommended for specifications of the Shared O-RU.  The recommended controls provided in this report will be shared with the responsible O-RAN Alliance working group, such as WG1 and WG4, so that the appropriate specification relevant to the recommendation can be updated.
Some of the identified Shared O-RU assets may already be in scope for of other ongoing WG11 security work items.  The Shared O-RU Security Analysis Technical Report work item may inform those work items.
References
The following documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of the present document.
[1] O-RAN ALLIANCE PD: "O-RAN Document Drafting Rules (ODR)".
[2] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Architecture Description (OAD)".
[3] MVPC-FP-Shared-O-RU-Feature-Plan-v05.00, Shared O-RU Feature Plan
[4] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Protocols Specifications".
[5] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Requirements Specifications".
[6] O-RAN ALLIANCE TR: "O-RAN Threat Modelling and Risk Assessment".
[7] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "O-RAN Security Test Specifications".
[8] Zero Trust Architecture, NIST SP 800-207, NIST, August 2020, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-207/final.
[9] US National Security Agency (NSA) / Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), Security Guidance for 5G Cloud Infrastructures, Part I, Oct 28, 2021, Part II, Nov 18, 2021, Part III, Dec 2, 2021, Part IV, Dec 16, 2021.  https://www.nsa.gov/Press-Room/Cybersecurity-Advisories-Guidance/smdpage11747/2/ (as of Feb 28, 2022).
[10] ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Information Security Management System (ISMS).
[11] NIST SP 800-53r5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations, 2020.
[12] OWASP Top 10 Web Application Security Risks, 2021, https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/.
[13] Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), Top Threats to Cloud Computing: Egregious Eleven, 2019, https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/artifacts/top-threats-to-cloud-computing-egregious-eleven.
[14] Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), Top Threats to Cloud Computing: Pandemic Eleven, 2022, https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/artifacts/top-threats-to-cloud-computing-pandemic-eleven.
[15] OWASP Top 10 Proactive Controls, 2021, https://owasp.org/projects/spotlight/historical/2021.02.10/
[16] Center for Internet Security (CIS) Critical Security Controls, https://www.cisecurity.org/controls/cis-controls-list
[17] Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) Cloud Control Matrix (CCM), https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/cloud-controls-matrix/
[18] ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Information Security Management System (ISMS).
[19] NIST SP 800-53r5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations, 2020.
[20] O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "Management Plane Specification".
Definitions of terms, symbols and abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the following terms and definitions apply:
Terms
This document uses the verbal forms for the expression of provisions as defined in O-RAN Document Drafting Rules (ODR)[1].
This document uses the term Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) as defined by US NIST in [8] and applied to 5G cloud deployments by US CISA in [9].  A ZTA provides protection from external and internal threats, assuming the following:
there is no implicit trust granted to an asset based upon ownership, physical location, or network location [8].
the adversary is already inside the network. Perimeter defenses are no longer sufficient to secure a network, and there should always be an assumption that a threat actor has established a foothold in the network [9].
This document uses the term “attack surface” defined by US NIST as
The set of points on the boundary of a system, a system element, or an environment where an attacker can try to enter, cause an effect on, or extract data from, that system, system element, or environment. [https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/attack_surface]
This document refers to “sensitive information” defined by US NIST as
information whose loss, misuse, or unauthorized access or modification could adversely affect security. [https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/sensitive]
Symbols
None
Abbreviations
For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given in 3GPP TR 21.905 and the following apply:
AI	Artificial Intelligence
DAR	Data at Rest
DIM	Data in Motion
DIU	Data in Use
gNB	gNodeB (applies to NR)
HTTP	Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS	Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
ML	Machine Learning
MNO	Mobile Network Operator
NF	Network Function
NHC	Neutral Host Controller
O-CU	Open-Centralized Unit
O-DU	Open-Distributed Unit
O-RU	Open-Radio Unit
OFH		Open Fronthaul
PII	Personally Identifiable Information
PKI		Public Key Infrastructure
SMO	Service Management and Orchestration
SRO	Shared Resource Operator
TLS	Transport Layer Security
ZTA	Zero Trust Architecture
Shared O-RU Assets
Architecture
The potential benefits of Shared O-RU are RAN Sharing, Neutral Host, high RAN reliability (redundancy) and RAN processing pooling.  Shared O-RU involves cooperation with the SMO, O-CU, O-DU, and O-RU network.  Securing the Shared O-RU is imperative to protect the O-RAN deployment and each of its tenants.  Five optional configurations are being considered for Shared O-RU [3] and while there are common security risks, each configuration may also introduce unique security risks.  The Attack Surface of the Shared O-RU includes assets groups Functions, Interfaces, and Information, which each have assets that should be protected. The assets that should be protected are listed in the following sections.
Figure 4.1-1 shows the Shared O-RU building blocks and protocol stack.
Figure 4.1-1: Shared O-RU Tenant/Host Split
The following points are considered:
The Shared O-RU can be receiving data via a single/shared physical port. This connectivity is used to transfer tenant and host-specific controller functionality.
The tenant/host-split point is the earliest point in the protocol stack when host and tenants are going to be separated/isolated.
Each of the tenants can obtain access (i.e., read/write) to its own resources, and a tenant has no means to access neighbor resources.
The host can obtain access (i.e., read/write) to common M-plane resources.
The user will be authenticated by using username and password/certificate and in case of netconf/ssh by using public/private key. In successful case the user is obtaining authorization on Module Level. Access control management (ACM) functionality required on that protocol level.
Every tenant who is requesting access to ‘own’= tenant specific resources, needs to be identified using its unique SRO-Id, and after successful authentication, the tenant will be authorized to access its own resources.
Functions
The following functions should be considered in the Shared O-RU risk analysis:
ASSET-C-31: Shared O-RU
ASSET-C-32: O-RU Host
ASSET-C-33: O-RU Tenant (Shared Resource Operator)
ASSET-C-34: O-DU Host
ASSET-C-35: O-DU Tenant (Shared Resource Operator)
ASSET-C-36: O-CU Host, includes O-CU-CP and O-CU-CP software
ASSET-C-37: O-CU Tenant (Shared Resource Operator), includes O-CU-CP and O-CU-CP software
ASSET-C-38: SMO Host
ASSET-C-39: SMO Tenant (Shared Resource Operator)
Neutral Host Controller (NHC)
NOTE:  NHC is not an agreed upon function in the O-RAN architecture
Figures 4.2-1, 4.2-2, and 4.2-3 below show these assets in Shared O-RU architecture.
Figure 4.2-1 Security Architecture for Shared O-RU Options 1 and 2
Figure 4.2-2 Security Architecture for Shared O-RU Options 3 and 4
Figure 4.2-3 Security Architecture for Shared O-RU Options 5
NOTE: NHC is not an agreed upon function in the O-RAN architecture
Interfaces
The following interfaces, as shown in Figures 4.2-1, 4.2-2, and 4.2-3, are considered in this phase of the Shared O-RU security analysis:
ASSET-C-22: O1
ASSET-C-24: OFH M-Plane: OAM Config and Carrier Config
New interfaces for Shared O-RU currently in specifications development will be considered in a later phase of the security analysis.  This includes Fast Dynamic Scheduling between Host and Tenant O-DUs and Slow Dynamic Scheduling between Host and Tenant SMOs.
Information
The following Shared O-RU information and data should be considered in a risk analysis:
O1 Data
ASSET-D-03: O1 Critical management plane data
ASSET-D-09: O1 informational data
M-Plane Data
ASSET-D-02: Critical Management Plane Data
ASSET-D-18: O-RAN network function configuration data
ASSET-D-24: Netconf Data Stores
ASSET-D-25: O-RAN Analog Training or Test Data
Secret Stores
ASSET-D-16: X.509 certificates
ASSET-D-17: Private keys
ASSET-D-19: Cryptographic Keys (such as session keys for, e.g., IPsec, MACsec, …)
ASSET-D-20: Administrator credentials (passwords and tokens)
ASSET-D-32: Cryptographic keys used during secure boot, for encryption/decryption, etc.
Service Account Management Data
ASSET-D-yy-new1: Credentials (Services)
User Account Management Data
ASSET-D-20: Credentials (Administrators)
PII
ASSET-D-30: O-RAN specific UE IDs
ASSET-D-yy-new3: Sensitive Information (e.g., public IP address, …)
Event logs
ASSET-D-29: Security Event Log Files
Trusted Environment
ASSET-D-yy-new2: Trusted Environment
CUS-plane Data
ASSET-D-yy-new4: Protection of User-plane data and Control-plane data.
Editor’s Note: This ASSET needs to be defined in ORAN T&R model.
ASSET-D-yy-new5: Protection of RRM scheduling data (i.e., slow and fast dynamic schedule data)
Editor’s Note: This ASSET needs to be defined in ORAN T&R model.
Asset identifier with a number indicates that the asset has been identified in the O-RAN Threat Modelling and Remediation Analysis document [6].  Inclusion of an asset identifier ASSET-X-yy-new indicates the asset has not yet been added to [6].
Threats
Threat Model
The STRIDE model is used to classify threats:
S - Spoofing identity. An application or program can masquerade as another to gain advantages not typically allowed for that program.
T - Tampering with data. This involves the malicious modification of data, including making unauthorized changes to a database and alteration of data as it flows between computers.
R - Repudiation. A user or program refuses the authenticity of a good or reasonable command or action.
I - Information disclosure. This involves the exposure of information to individuals with unauthorized access to it. For example, users gain the ability to read a file that they normally would not have been granted access to, or an intruder can read data in transit between computers.
D - Denial of service. These attacks deny service to valid users, such as making a website unavailable or unusable by flooding it with illegitimate requests to keep legitimate users without access.
E - Elevation of privileges. An unauthorized user gains privileged rights to access previously no granted to compromise or destroy the system, such as a change in membership.
Threat Template
Template to present the threat characteristics:
Potential Threats and Exploits
A threat analysis is facilitated by an understanding of potential threats, as identified by the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) and the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP).
The OWASP Top 10 Web Application Security Risks [12] was updated in 2021 to include the following:
A01:2021 Broken Access Control
A02:2021 Cryptographic Failure
A03:2021 Injection (including Cross-Site Scripting)
A04:2021 Insecure Design
A05:2021 Security Misconfiguration
A06:2021 Vulnerable and Outdated Components
A07:2021 Identification and Authentication Failures
A08:2021 Software and Data Integrity Failures (including Insecure Deserialization)
A09:2021 Security Logging and Monitoring Failures
A10:2021 Server-Side Request Forgery
The CSA Top Threats to Cloud in 2019 was labelled the “Egregious Eleven” [13], as listed below:
Data Breaches
Misconfiguration and Inadequate Change Control
Lack of Cloud Security Architecture and Strategy
Insufficient Identity, Credential, Access, and Key Management
Account Hijacking
Insider Threat
Insecure Interfaces and APIs
Weak Control plane
Metastructure and Applistructure Failures
Limited Cloud Usage Visibility
Abuse and Nefarious Uses of Cloud Services
The CSA updated its list of top threats to cloud in 2022 and renamed it the “Pandemic Eleven” [14], as listed below:
1. Insufficient Identity, Credential, Access and Key Management, Privileged Accounts
2. Insecure Interfaces and APIs
3. Misconfiguration and Inadequate Change Control
4. Lack of Cloud Security Architecture and Strategy
5. Insecure Software Development
6. Unsecure Third-Party Resources
7. System Vulnerabilities
8. Accidental Cloud Data Disclosure
9. Misconfiguration and Exploitation of Serverless and Container Workloads
10. Organized Crime, Hackers & APT
11. Cloud Storage Data Exfiltration
Shared O-RU Threats
The security risks associated with the Shared O-RU are due to:
1. resource sharing in a multi-tenant environment
2. interworking between host and tenant network functions
3. interfaces between Shared O-RU and other O-RAN functions
The Shared O-RU threat analysis considers the threats listed in clause 5.3 that are relevant to O-RAN and Shared O-RU.  The following threats to Shared O-RU have been identified and will be analyzed in clause 6 – Threat Analysis.
Threats due to Multi-Tenancy
O-DU Host access to O-DU Tenant through Shared O-RU
O-DU Tenant access to O-DU Host through Shared O-RU
SMO Host access to SMO Tenant
SMO Tenant access to SMO Host
Threats at Shared O-RU functions
Parameter conflicts at Shared O-RU
Privilege levels for authorization to data and processes in O-RU, O-DU, and SMO
Escalation of privilege at NHC
Threats to Shared O-RU interfaces
Untrusted peering between Shared O-RU and O-DU
Insecure APIs
Message flooding
Unprotected data in transit
Threat Analysis
Threat Analysis tables are provided for each of the identified Shared O-RU threats in the subsections below. The Shared O-RU Threats are classified into the following 6 threat groups:
Lateral Movement Between Network Functions
User Access Threats
Data Access Threats
Availability Threats
Configuration Threats
Neutral Host Controller Threats
Table 6-1 summarizes the identified threats for each of the Shared O-RU threat groups.  The threat analysis considers a zero trust architecture (ZTA) for which (i) micro-perimeters are established for each asset and (ii) there is no implicit trust granted to assets or users [8].  Shared O-RU assets, as discussed in the Functions, Interfaces, and Information asset groups in clause 4- Assets, are considered for the threat analysis. The threats analysis was performed on the five architectural options being considered for deployment of Shared O-RU [3], which allow use of M-Plane Hybrid or Hierarchical mode and optional use of a Neutral Host Controller (NHC).
Table 6-1 summarizes the identified threats for each of the Shared O-RU threat groups.  This may not be an exhaustive list and may be expanded in future versions of this Technical Report.
Use of the term “MNO Tenant” or “Tenant” refers to a “Shared Resource Operator (SRO)” as defined in O-RAN ALLIANCE TS: "Management Plane Specification.[20].
Table 6-1 Shared O-RU Threats
Lateral Movement Between Network Functions
This section provides threat analysis tables for threats to access between Shared O-RU network functions.
User Access Threats
This section provides threat analysis tables for user access threats to Shared O-RU.
Data Access Threats
This section provides threat analysis tables for threats to Shared O-RU data access.
Availability Threats
This section provides threat analysis tables for availability threats to Shared O-RU.
Configuration Threats
This section provides threat analysis tables for configuration threats to Shared O-RU.
Neutral Host Controller (NHC) Threats
This section provides threat analysis tables for threats introduced by the NHC.
Security Controls
Industry recommendations for strong security controls are provided from sources such as the OWASP Top 10 Proactive Controls [15], Center for Internet Security (CIS) Critical Security Controls [16], Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) Cloud Control Matrix (CCM) [17], ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Information Security Management System (ISMS) [18], NIST SP 800-53r5 Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations [19], and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) Security Guidance for 5G Cloud Infrastructures [9].
The OWASP Top 10 Proactive Controls are as follow:
C1: Define Security Requirements
C2: Leverage Security Frameworks and Libraries
C3: Secure Database Access
C4: Encode and Escape Data
C5: Validate All Inputs
C6: Implement Digital Identity
C7: Enforce Access Controls
C8: Protect Data Everywhere
C9: Implement Security Logging and Monitoring
C10: Handle All Errors and Exceptions
The CIS Critical Security Controls are as follow:
CIS Control 1: Inventory and Control of Enterprise Assets
CIS Control 2: Inventory and Control of Software Assets
CIS Control 3: Data Protection
CIS Control 4: Secure Configuration of Enterprise Assets and Software
CIS Control 5: Account Management
CIS Control 6: Access Control Management
CIS Control 7: Continuous Vulnerability Management
CIS Control 8: Audit Log Management
CIS Control 9: Email Web Browser and Protections
CIS Control 10: Malware Defenses
CIS Control 11: Data Recovery
CIS Control 12: Network Infrastructure Management
CIS Control 13: Network Monitoring and Defense
CIS Control 14: Security Awareness and Skills Training
CIS Control 15: Service Provider Management
CIS Control 16: Application Software Security
CIS Control 17: Incident Response Management
CIS Control 18: Penetration Testing
Relevant controls from the CSA CCM are 2. Application and Interface Security, 5. Cryptography, Encryption, and Key Management, 7. Data Security and Privacy Lifecycle Management, and 10. Identity and Access Management (IAM).
Relevant controls from ISO/IEC 27001:2013 are 5. Access Controls, 6. Cryptography, and 9. Communications Security.
Relevant controls from NIST SP 800-53r5 are 1. Access Controls, 16. Risk Assessment, 18. System and Communications Protection, and 19. System and Information Integrity.
Relevant controls from CISA’s Security Guidance are TLS 1.2, or higher, with PKI and X.509 certificates, Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA), Principle of Least Privilege, Continuous Monitoring and Logging, and data confidentiality and protection as components of a zero trust architecture as defined in NIST SP 800-207 [8].
With consideration of these external sources, the following security controls should be evaluated for the Shared O-RU risk analysis:
Control-1: TLS with PKI and X.509 certificates
Control-2: OAuth 2.0
Control-3: IAM (using RBAC, ABAC, PBAC, TBAC)
Control-4: Principle of Least Privilege
Control-5: Certificate Management
Control-6: API Message Integrity Protection and Input Validation
Control-7: API Message Authentication
Control-8: Encryption for Data at Rest
Control-9: Encryption for Data in Motion
Control-10: Integrity Protection for Data at Rest
Control-11: Integrity Protection for Data in Motion
Control-12: Integrity Protection for Data in Use
Control-13: Digital Signatures
Control-14: Monitoring and Logging
Control-15: Alerting
Control-16: Rate-Limiting
Control-17: Configuration Validation
Control-18: Network Segmentation and Traffic Filtering
Control-19: 802.1X Port-based Network Access Control
Control-20: Conflict Mitigation
Control-21: Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
Control-22: Transport Path Separation
Control-23: Authenticated Resource Release Enforcement
Risk Assessment
This section provides risk assessment tables for each of the identified assets.  These tables list the assets, threats, impacts, and possible security controls.
A malicious actor may be a nation-state adversary, cybercriminal, or employee.  In a ZTA, perimeter defenses alone are insufficient.  O-RAN deployments, including Shared O-RU, must be protected from untrusted external sources attempting to have access, while also assuming internal threat actors are inside the network with access to its functions and data.  Security controls for a ZTA, protecting against external and internal threats, should be implemented through a risk-based approach.  A risk analysis calculates risk levels by assessing the threat’s Likelihood of attack and the Impact from the attack.  External and internal threats are from the perspective of the O-RAN architecture.  External Threats are external to the O-RAN and Internal Threats are internal to O-RAN.
Impact scores can be lowered with consideration of existing security controls.  Impact scoring is based upon current security controls.  Impact scoring does not consider security controls that may be potentially specified in the future.
Likelihood scores may be higher when the goal is a ZTA, because external and internal threats must be considered.  When likelihood scoring during a risk analysis, it is necessary to consider internal threats performing reconnaissance attacks impacting confidentiality and privacy and attacks causing damage or degrading performance impacting availability.  Internal threat actors are less likely to perform damaging attacks that are quickly and easily detected and blocked, but more likely to attempt reconnaissance attacks to collect information.  As a result, reconnaissance type attacks can be scored Likelihood = High while damaging/availability attacks can be scored Likelihood = Medium or Low.
A risk analysis of the Shared O-RU threats is provided in the tables below.  A security best practice is to periodically repeat the risk analysis to consider evolving threats and security controls, which may produce an adjusted risk score based upon Impact and Likelihood.
Lateral Movement Between Network Functions
Table 8-1. Shared O-RU Risk Analysis - Lateral Movement Between Network Functions
User Access Threats
Table 8-2. Shared O-RU Risk Analysis – User Access Threats
Data Access Threats
Table 8-3. Shared O-RU Risk Analysis – Data Access Threats
Availability Threats
Table 8-4. Shared O-RU Risk Analysis – Availability Threats
Configuration Threats
Table 8-5. Shared O-RU Risk Analysis – Configuration Threats
Neutral Host Controller Threats
Table 8-6. Shared O-RU Risk Analysis – Neutral Host Controller Threats
Primary Security Issues
The security analysis described in the document has identified the following issues:
New interfaces currently in specifications development process are out of scope in WG11 until further progress is made on the specifications in WG4.  These interfaces are Fast Dynamic Scheduling between Host and Tenant O-DUs and Slow Dynamic Scheduling between Host and Tenant SMOs.
At this time, Neutral Host Controller (NHC) is not included in the O-RAN architecture, as specified in [2].  Security analysis of the NHC may need to be performed again depending upon decisions made by WG1 and WG4. This work item will form normative requirements for the NHC only when WG1 has officially added the NHC to the O-RAN architecture.  Until that time there will be no update via CR to add NHC to the following documents:
O-RAN Security Requirements Specification [5]
O-RAN Security Threat Modeling and Remediation Analysis [6]
O-RAN Security Test Specification [7]
Recommendations
The security analysis described in the document has produced the following recommendations:
ZTA requires confidentiality, integrity, and availability protection for network functions and internal interfaces used in the Shared O-RU architecture.  Critical security controls for Shared O-RU to comply with a ZTA are:
mTLS for authentication
OAuth 2.0 for authorization
TLS for data in transit
Encrypt data at rest
MFA for human user login
Logging with tenant-awareness
Role-Based Access Controls (RBAC) for human users to access data
Open Fronthaul specification currently allows password-based authentication [20].  PKI-based X.509 certificates is recommended for machine-to-machine authentication in a Shared O-RU multi-tenant environment.  If SSH is used then asymmetric keys should be used instead of password.
In a multi-tenant environment, 802.1X will enforce port-based network access control on all Shared O-RU ethernet-based management interfaces and ethernet-based network interfaces.  WG11 should address 802.1X requirements for Shared O-RU with relevant working groups, including WG1, WG4, WG5, and WG6.
Shared O-RU is at risk of conflicting parameters from Host and Tenant (SRO).  Conflict mitigation should be implemented.  The mechanism for handling conflicting parameters is specified in clause 19.11 “Partitioning of shared O-RU carrier resources” of the O-RAN Open Fronthaul M-Plane specification [20]. This clause identifies common Shared O-RU resources shared across tenants, also called SROs, and defines the expectation that logic for resolving conflicting configuration logic resides outside of Shared O-RU. This was based on WG4 technical evaluation of proposals that concluded the O-RU is not the preferred place for resolving conflicting configuration.
Tenant isolation should be implemented for Host and Tenants having co-located resources and/or sharing resources. Tenant isolation for Shared O-RU is addressed in clauses 19.3.1, 19.3.3, and 19.6.1 of the O-RAN Open Fronthaul M-Plane specification [20]. These clauses introduce new access privilege groups for NETCONF clients that share the O-RU and define how the ‘carrier’ access privilege is used in the context of carrier management on the Open Fronthaul. Each tenant, also called SRO, user account is associated with a sro-id and ‘carrier’ access privilege.
Annex A:	Shared O-RU All-in-One Architecture
This section describes the concept of a Shared O-RU architecture as shown in Figure A.1-1.  The “All-in-One” architecture represents a single deployment scenario. The Shared O-RU is connected to one or more tenants, while one tenant takes over the host role.
Figure A.1-  Shared O-RU ’All-in-One’ Architecture (overview)
The following points are considered for the All-in-One architecture:
The separation of Host and Tenant refers to the multi-MNO deployment scenario, while a merging of both network functions is referring to the single-MNO deployment.
The Neutral Host Controller is interfaced via a ‘common M-plane’ to O-RU Netconf Server, and the O-DU (host/tenant) is interfaced via a ‘Carrier Configuration’ to the O-RU Netconf Server.
The common Netconf client functionality can be embedded either inside O-DU network function or can be placed in an external entity namely neutral host controller (NHC). Anyway, for both deployments the common Netconf client is interfaced to the server via a common M-plane, while the Netconf client is interfaced to the Netconf server for carrier configuration purposes.
The neutral host controller (NHC) is assumed to be inside an ‘untrusted ORAN’, while the O-RAN specific entities are residing inside the ‘trusted ORAN’. The separation of ‘trusted’ and ‘untrusted’ O-RAN is creating additional threat vectors.
Figure A.1-2 shows a simplified view of the ‘All-in-One’ architecture.  The following points about “host” and “tenant” is considered:
The shared O-RU is at the same time interfaces to a host and to a tenant. The term ‘host’ refers to all entities which include host specific functionalities, e.g., Neutral Host Controller or SMO host etc. The term ‘tenant’ refers to all entities which include tenant specific functionalities.
Both, the host, and the tenant, support a CUS-plane interface, and both support the carrier configuration function via the O-FH M-plane interface. These can be regarded as basic functions of a tenant.
The host is supporting the common M-plane which is transferred over the O-FH M-plane interface. This is a specific function provided by the host.
For the shared O-RU the concurrent support of a ‘host’ and ‘tenant’ is required, and therefore needs to be considered for security.
Figure A.1-2 Shared O-RU Simplified ‘All-in-One’ Architecture (Security Viewpoint)
History